LETTERS ON OCCULT MEDITATION 
RECEIVED AND EDITED  
BY 
ALICE A. BAILEY 
COPYRIGHT © 1950 BY LUCIS TRUST 
COPYRIGHT © RENEWED 1978 BY LUCIS TRUST 
Dedicated to The Tibetan Teacher 
who 
wrote these letters 
and 
authorised their publication 
Foreword 
FOREWORD 
The following letters were received during the period included within the dates, May  16th, 1920, and October 20th, 1920, with the exception of the two letters which were  received in 1919. With the consent of their author they have been gathered together  for publication. 
They are published in full as received, with the exception of certain parts which have  a purely personal application, those having reference to a certain occult school, and  those of a prophetic or esoteric nature, which may not now be communicated. 
It is hoped that those who read these letters will endeavour to do two things: 
1. Read always with an open mind, remembering that the truth is a many-sided  diamond, and that its different aspects will appear at different times, as those who guide the race see a need which must be met. Many books on meditation have been  written, some too abstruse and some too superficial to satisfy the average educated  man. The writer of these letters has apparently attempted to supply the need of a brief  yet scientific exposition of a rationale of meditation, emphasising the goal  immediately ahead and the intermediate stages. 
2. Judge of the letters on their merits and not upon claims put forth on behalf of the  writer. For this reason he has chosen to preserve his anonymity and has requested the  recipient of the letters to publish them under his pseudonym. 
If the subject matter of the letters is of value it will call forth a response from the  readers and serve to help some onward towards the goal, and prove to many the  inspiration and aid it already has to a few.
ALICE A. BAILEY. 
New York, 1922. 
The constitution of man (See Figure), as considered in the following pages, is  basically threefold, as follows 
I. The Monad, or pure Spirit, the Father in Heaven. 
This aspect reflects the three aspects of the Godhead: 
1. Will or Power The Father 
2. Love-Wisdom The Son 
3. Active Intelligence The Holy Spirit 
and is only contacted at the final initiations, when man is nearing the end of his  journey and is perfected. 
The Monad reflects itself again in 
II. The Ego, Higher Self, or Individuality.  
This aspect is potentially :— 
1. Spiritual Will Atma 
2. Intuition Buddic, Love-Wisdom, the Christ principle.  
3. Higher or abstract Mind Higher Manas.  
The Ego begins to make its power felt in advanced men, and increasingly on the  Probationary Path until by the third initiation the control of the lower self by the  higher is perfected, and the highest aspect begins to make its energy felt. 
The Ego reflects itself in 
III. The Personality, or lower self, physical plane man.  
This aspect is also threefold 
1. A mental bodylower manas.  
2. An emotinal body astral body.  
3. A physical body the dense physical and the etheric body.  
The aim of meditation is therefore to bring man to the realisation of the Egoic aspect  and to bring the lower nature under its control. This is the immediate goal for the  average man. 
LETTER I - THE ALIGNMENT OF THE EGO WITH THE PERSONALITY
LETTER I 
THE ALIGNMENT OF THE EGO WITH THE PERSONALITY. 
1—The Aligning of the three lower bodies. 
2—Aligning with the Causal Body. 
3—The Method of Alignment. 
4—Macrocosmic and Microcosmic Alignment. 
[Page 1]  
LETTER I 
ALIGNMENT OF THE EGO WITH THE PERSONALITY. 
Sunday, May 16, 1920. 
It is in the aligning of the three vehicles, the physical, the emotional, and the lower  mind body, within the causal periphery, and their stabilising there by an effort of the  will, that the real work of the Ego or Higher Self in any particular incarnation can be  accomplished. The great thinkers of the race, the true exponents of lower mind, are  fundamentally those whose three lower bodies are aligned; that is to say those whose  mental body holds the other two in circumspect alignment. The mental body, then, is  in direct communication, unobstructed and free from interference, straight through to  the physical brain. 
When the alignment is fourfold and when the three above-mentioned bodies are  aligned with the body of the Higher Self, the causal or egoic body, and held steady  within its circumference, then the great leaders of the race,—those who emotionally  and intellectually sway mankind, can be seen working; then the inspirational writers  and dreamers can bring down their inspirations and dreams; and then the synthetic  and abstract thinkers [Page 2] can transfer their conceptions to the world of form. It  is, right through, a question of an unimpeded channel. Study, therefore, in this  connection and when time permits, physical co-ordination; then to physical co ordination add emotional stability, and you have the two vehicles functioning as one.  When the co-ordination extends to the mental body, the threefold lower man is  reaching his apotheosis, and has rung most of the changes in the world of form. 
Later comes co-ordination perfected with the Higher Self, the channel of  communication reaching in line direct,—via an unimpeded funnel, if so I might  express it,—to the physical brain consciousness. Heretofore it has only been direct at  rare intervals. The four lesser brain centres are functioning at high vibration in the  man of a highly co-ordinated personality; when the Ego is nearing alignment with the  lower bodies, the pineal gland and the pituitary body are in process of development;  and when they are functioning with correlation (which eventuates by the time the  third Initiation is taken), then the third, or alta major centre, intensifies its hitherto 
gentle vibration. When the fifth Initiation is taken, the interplay between the three  centres is perfected, and the alignment of the bodies is geometrically rectified; you  have then the perfected fivefold superman. 
For the average man, then, this alignment occurs only at intervals, in moments of  stress, in hours of needed humanitarian effort and in times of intensest aspiration.  Abstraction of a more or less degree has to enter in before the Ego takes continued  notice of the personality or lower self. When that abstraction involves the emotions,  is based in the mentality and contacts the physical brain, then alignment is  commencing. 
[Page 3]  
Hence the work of meditation, for it tends to abstraction and seeks to awaken to  abstract consciousness both the emotions and the mentality. 
Alignment and Vibration. 
Forget not either that it is largely a question of matter and vibration. The abstract  levels of the mental plane consist of the three higher levels, the first being that termed  the third subplane. As I have explained to you before, each subplane has its  correlations on the major planes. When, therefore, you have built into your bodies,— physical, emotional and mental,—matter of the third subplane of each of those planes,  then the Higher self commences consciously and ever more continuously to function  through the aligning Personality. Perhaps we might reverse the idea and state that it is  only when third subplane matter of a certain percentage (which percentage is one of  the secrets of Initiation) is contained in the vehicles, that the Personality as a  conscious whole recognises and obeys that Higher self. After such a percentage is  attained, it is then necessary to build in matter of the two higher subplanes on the  physical and emotional planes; hence the struggle for the aspirant to purify and  discipline the physical body and to subdue the emotional. Purification and  subjugation describe the work to be done on the two planes. This involves the use of  lower mind, and the three lower vehicles thus become aligned. 
The vibrations of the abstract levels can then begin to be felt. You need to remember  that they come via the causal body, the vehicle of the Higher Self, and the average  causal body is on the third subplane of the mental plane. This is a point not  sufficiently recognised. Ponder on it. Real abstract thought becomes possible only  when the Personality has, by vibration reciprocal to that of the [Page 4] Ego, aligned  itself sufficiently to form a fairly unimpeded channel. Then at intervals, rare at first  but of increasing frequency, will abstract ideas begin to filter down, to be followed in  due time by flashes of real illumination or intuition from the spiritual Triad or the true  threefold Ego itself. 
The Chord of the Ego. 
When I use the term "reciprocal vibration," what do I mean? I mean the adaptation of  the Personality or Lower Self, to the Ego, or Higher Self, the dominating of the  Personality ray by the ray of the Ego and the combining of their tones. I mean the  blending of the primary colour of the Higher Self with the secondary hue of the  Lower Self until beauty is achieved. At first, there is dissonance and discord, a 
clashing of the colours, and a fight between the Higher and the Lower. But as time  progresses, and later with the aid of the Master, harmony of colour and tone is  produced (a synonymous matter), until eventually you will have the basic note of  matter, the major third of the aligned Personality, the dominant fifth of the Ego,  followed by the full chord of the Monad or Spirit. 
It is the dominant we seek at adeptship, and earlier the perfected third of the  Personality. During our various incarnations we strike and ring the changes on all the  intervening notes, and sometimes our lives are major and sometimes minor, but  always they tend to flexibility and greater beauty. In due time, each note fits into its  chord, the chord of the Spirit; each chord forms part of a phrase, the phrase or group  to which the chord belongs; and the phrase goes to the completion of one seventh of  the whole. The entire seven sections, then, complete the sonata of this solar  system,—a part of the threefold masterpiece of the Logos or God, the Master Musician. 
[Page 5]  
June 2, 1920. 
Microcosmic and Macrocosmic Alignment. 
This morning, I would touch on the matter of egoic alignment again, showing you,  under the Law of Correspondences, the universal application. It lies based in  geometry, or in figures and numbers. 
The aim of the evolution of man in the three worlds—the physical, emotional and  mental planes—is the alignment of his threefold Personality with the body egoic, till  the one straight line is achieved and the man becomes the One. 
Each life that the Personality leads is, at the close, represented by some geometrical  figure, some utilisation of the lines of the cube, and their demonstration in a form of  some kind. Intricate and uncertain in outline and crude in design are the forms of the  earlier lives; definite and clear in outline are the forms built by the average advanced  man of this generation. But when he steps upon the Path of Discipleship, the purpose  consists in merging all these many lines into one line, and gradually this  consummation is achieved. The Master is He Who has blended all the lines of  fivefold development first into the three, and then into the one. The six-pointed star  becomes the five-pointed star, the cube becomes the triangle, and the triangle  becomes the one; whilst the one (at the end of the greater cycle) becomes the point in  the circle of manifestation. 
Hence the effort made to teach all devotees simplicity, based on a trinity of  foundation truths, and the inculcation of one-pointedness. 
Each life tends to greater stability but seldom is the three-fold Personality yet to be  found lined up, if so I [Page 6] may put it, with the causal consciousness. Temporary  moments occur when this is the case and when (in moments of highest aspiration and  for purposes of unselfish endeavor) the higher and the lower form a line direct.  Usually the emotional body, through violent emotion and vibration, or a fluctuating  restlessness, is continuously out of alignment. Where the emotional body may be 
momentarily aligned, then the mental body acts as an obstruction, preventing the  percolation down from the higher to the lower, and so to the physical brain. It takes  many lives of strenuous endeavor before the emotional body can be stilled and a  mental body built that will act as a filter and not as an impediment. Even when this  has been somewhat accomplished and the emotional body is stabilised and a pure  reflector, and the mental body serves the purpose of a sensitive plate and  discriminator, and the intelligent explainer of the higher imparted truth,—even then, I  say, it takes much discipline and many lives of effort to align the two at the same  time. When that is done, the control of the physical brain and its final alignment  remain to be effected, so that it may act as a direct receiver and transmitter of the  imparted teaching, and may reflect with accuracy the higher consciousness. 
Wherein, therefore, lies the macrocosmic correspondence? Where is the analogy in  the Solar System? An indication I give here. In the direct alignment of certain  planets in the process of systemic evolution, with each other and with the Sun comes  Logoic or divine alignment. Think this out, but one word of warning I give. Seek not  to work out hypotheses of alignment based on the physical planets. The truth lies not  there. Only three of the physical planets (and those three in etheric matter) enter into  the final alignment that marks the attainment [Page 7] by the Logos of the cosmic  egoic consciousness, which is His goal of attainment. Of these three, the earth is not  one, but Venus has her place corresponding to the emotional permanent atom. 
Further still the alignment may be progressed:—in the alignment of our entire solar  system with the system of Sirius lies a still more remote goal. It is a point far ahead in  time, but holds hid the secret of the greater cycle. 
[Page 8]  
LETTER II - IMPORTANCE OF MEDITATION 
LETTER II 
THE IMPORTANCE OF MEDITATION. 
l—It results in egoic contact and alignment. 
2—It brings about a state of equilibrium. 
3—It stabilises vibration. 
4—It assists in a transference of polarisation. 
[Page 9]  
LETTER II 
THE IMPORTANCE OF MEDITATION. 
June 3, 1920.
Let me this morning give you some more thoughts on the subject of meditation; they  will bear somewhat on the matter given yesterday, and on the 16th ultimo. 
Fundamentally, meditation is to assist alignment and so permit of contact with the  Higher Self; hence its institution. I would, in order duly to elucidate, take up the  study of this topic under the following heads: 
The Importance of Meditation. 
Points considered when assigning a Meditation. 
The use of the Sacred Word in Meditation. 
Dangers to be avoided in Meditation. 
The use of Form in Meditation. 
The use of Colour and Sound in Meditation. 
Access to the Masters through Meditation. 
Future Schools of Meditation. 
Purification of the Vehicles. 
The Exoteric Life of Service. 
Let us today take up the consideration of the first point:—What makes Meditation of  importance? 
The emphasis upon the importance of meditation follows naturally upon the  realisation by the student of the absolute necessity for the domination of the  Personality by the Ego. 
Man at this time is engaged in many pursuits and through the force of circumstances  he is polarised entirely in the lower self, that polarisation being in either the emotional  or mental body. One point of interest I would indicate:—as long as the polarisation is  purely [Page 10] physical or purely emotional, no need for meditation is ever felt.  Even when the mental body is active, no urge arises until the man has run through  many changes and many lives, has tasted the cup of pleasure and of pain through  many incarnations, has sounded the depths of the life lived entirely for the lower self  and found it unsatisfying. Then he begins to turn his thought to other things, to aspire  to that which is unknown, to realize and sense within himself the pairs of opposites,  and to contact within his consciousness possibilities and ideals undreamt of hitherto.  He has come to a point where success, popularity and diverse gifts are his, and yet  from their use he derives no content; always the urge within persists until the pain is  so severe that the desire to reach out and up, to ascertain something and someone  beyond, overcomes all obstacles. The man begins to turn within and to seek the  source from whence he came. Then he begins to meditate, to ponder, to intensify  vibration until in process of time he garners the fruits of meditation. 
Four things meditation does: 
l—It enables a man to contact the Ego and to align the three lower bodies. 
2—It puts a man into an attitude of equilibrium, neither utterly receptive and negative,  nor utterly positive, but at the point of balance. Thus is afforded opportunity to the  Ego, and later to the Master, to disturb that equilibrium and tune the quiescent 
vibration to a higher note than heretofore; to cause the consciousness to vibrate to a  newer and higher measure, and to swing (if so I may express it) into the periphery of  the threefold Spirit. By the constant practice of this, the whole point of equilibrium is  gradually shifted higher and higher, until the time comes when the lower point of  [Page 11] attraction in the swinging and adjustment, is not the physical, touches not  the emotional, contacts not the mental (the causal body even escaping) and the man is  polarised in the spiritual consciousness from thenceforth. 
This marks the fourth Initiation; after that Initiation, the Adept makes for Himself a  body of manifestation, a free creation,—there is nothing in Him to call into objectivity  a body for use in the three worlds and evolved under the Law of Causes. 
3—It stabilises the lower vibrations on the subplanes of the emotional and mental  planes. It commences the work of attuning the self to the vibration of the third  subplane on each of the three lower planes, until that subplane is dominated. The  second subplane is then the next to be synchronised. 
A man reaches the point of personality attainment in this cycle when he has the  capacity to vibrate and move consciously on the fourth subplane. We might term the  fourth subplane on the physical, emotional and mental planes (when dominated,  aligned and functioning simultaneously in the same incarnation) the plane of  perfected personality in the concrete sense of the word, and from the lower vision.  That particular incarnation will be one in which the man achieves the fullest  expression of his lower self,—physically perfect, emotionally vibrant, and mentally  colossal. Then succeeding that, begins the transference to a higher vibration, the  keying up to the Higher Self, and the attuning of the Personality, or the major third, to  the dominant fifth of the Ego. 
4—It assists in the transference of the polarisation from one of the permanent atoms  of the Personality into the corresponding atom in the spiritual Triad. Later I will  elucidate this further. 
[Page 12]  
Hence may easily be seen the essential nature of Meditation and its wise, diligent and  serious following. 
Early in experience, after the attainment of the highest the lower nature has to offer,  man begins to meditate. Disorderly at first are his attempts, and sometimes several  incarnations may go by in which the Higher self only forces the man to think and  seriously to meditate at rare and separated intervals. More frequently come the  occasions of withdrawing within, until there arises for the man several lives given to  mystic meditation and aspiration, culminating usually in a life given entirely to it. It  marks the point of the highest emotional aspiration, apart from the scientific  application of the law, via the mental body. These laws are those governing the true  occult meditation. 
Behind each of you who are working definitely under one of the Masters, lie two lives  of culmination:—the life of worldly apotheosis and the life of intensest meditation  along the mystic or emotional-intuitional line. This meditative life was taken either in  a monastery or nunnery in middle Europe by those linked with the Master Jesus and 
His disciples, or in India, Tibet or China by the pupils of the Master M. or the Master  K. H. 
Now comes to all of you the most important series of lives to which the previous  points of culmination were but stepping stones. In the lives immediately ahead of  those upon the Path will come final achievement through the instrumentality of the  ordered occult meditation, based on law. For some few may come attainment in this  life or the next; for others, shortly in other lives. For a few there lies ahead the  attainment of the mystic method, to be the basis later on of the occult or mental  method.  
[Page 13]  
LETTER III - POINTS CONSIDERED WHEN ASSIGNING MEDITATION. LETTER III 
POINTS CONSIDERED WHEN ASSIGNING MEDITATION. 
l—The Ray of the Ego or Higher self. 
2—The Ray of the Personality or Lower self. 
3—Karmic condition of the threefold man. 
4—The condition of the Causal Body. 
5—The need of the period and the man's availability. 
6—The groups, inner and outer, with which he is affiliated. 
[Page 14]  
LETTER III 
POINTS CONSIDERED WHEN ASSIGNING MEDITATION. 
June 4, 1920. 
We have dealt with the importance of meditation, and I have suggested for your  consideration four reasons out of the many why the practice should he followed. At  this period when meditation is followed by many of you without the guidance of a  teacher who is personally acquainted with you on the physical plane, it has been  impossible to do more than formulate a plan for practice that carries in it the elements  of safety and of universality. 
When a teacher is on the spot, differentiated practice may be carried on suited to the  temperament of the pupil, and having certain attributes that make that particular  meditation the line of least resistance from the physical brain of the personality to the  causal body.
In formulating methods of meditation certain factors must be taken into consideration.  These factors I will now enumerate. I seek not to give you outlines and methods to be  followed. I but indicate the underlying principles that guide the teacher in the choice  of method suitable for the pupil. Later, when the teacher comes and the scientific  application of the method to the individual is being demonstrated, you can then see if  the rules laid down here are fundamentals or not. These fundamentals and principles  are all I seek to give. Method and detail must be worked out through the use of  discrimination, experience, courage and perseverance. 
The factors that must be considered by a teacher when assigning a meditation are six  in number, if we deal only with the principal ones. They are as follows: 
[Page 15]  
l—The Ray of the pupil's Ego, or Higher Self. 
2—The Ray of his Personality or Lower Self. 
3—The Karmic condition of his threefold lower nature. 
4—The condition of his Causal Body. 
5—The immediate need of the period and his availability. 
6—The groups, inner and outer, with which he may be affiliated. 
We will now take them up and consider them one by one. 
1—The Ray of Higher Self. 
The ray on which a man's causal body is found, the egoic ray, should determine the  type of meditation. Each ray necessitates a different method of approach, for the aim  of all meditation is union with the divine. At this stage, it is union with the spiritual  Triad, that has its lowest reflection on the mental plane. Let me illustrate briefly: 
When the egoic ray is what is termed the Power Ray, the method of approach has to  be by the application of the will in a dynamic form to the lower vehicles; it is largely  what we term achievement by an intense focusing, a terrific one-pointedness, that  inhibits all hindrances and literally forces a channel, thus driving itself into the Triad. 
When the egoic ray is the second or the Love-Wisdom Ray, the path of least  resistance lies along the line of expansion, of a gradual inclusion. It is not so much a  driving forward as it is a gradual expanding from an inner centre to include the  entourage, the environment, the allied souls, and the affiliated groups of pupils under  [Page 16] some one Master, until all are included in the consciousness. Carried to the  point of achievement, this expansion results in the final shattering of the causal body  at the fourth Initiation. In the first instance—achievement via the Power Ray—the  driving forward and the forcing upward had a like result; the opened channel admitted  the downflow of force or fire from the spirit and the causal body in time is equally  destroyed. 
When the egoic ray is the third or Activity-adaptability Ray, the method is somewhat  different. Not so much the driving forward, not so much the gradual expansion as the  systematic adaptation of all knowledge and of all means to the end in view. It is in  fact the process of the utilisation of the many for the use of the one; it is more the  accumulation of needed material and quality for the helping of the world, and the 
amassing of information through love and discrimination that eventually causes the  shattering of the causal body. In these "Rays of Aspect" or of divine expression, if so  I may call them, the shattering is brought about by the widening of the channel, due to  the driving power of will in the first case; by the expansion of the lower auric egg, the  causal body, in the second case, due to the inclusiveness of the synthetic Ray of Love  and Wisdom; and by the breaking of the periphery of the causal body in the third case,  due to the accumulative faculty and systematic absorption of the Adaptability Ray. 
All these three different methods have the same result, and are fundamentally all  forms of the one great method employed in the evolution of love or wisdom,—the  goal of endeavour in this present solar system. 
You have the will driving a man on to perfection, through realisation of the Higher,  and resulting in the service of power through love in activity. 
[Page 17]  
You have the wisdom or love aspect driving a man on to perfection through the  utilisation of his oneness with all that breathes, resulting in the service of love through  love in activity. 
You have the activity aspect driving a man on to perfection through the utilisation of  all in the service of man; first by the utilisation of all for himself, then by the graded  steps of the utilisation of all for the family, of all for those he personally loves, of all  for his environing associates, and thus on and up till all is utilised in the service of  
humanity. 
When the egoic ray is the attributive Ray of Harmony, the fourth ray, the method will  be along the line of the inner realisation of beauty and harmony; it causes the  shattering of the causal body by the knowledge of Sound and Colour and the  shattering effect of Sound. It is the process that leads to the realisation of the notes  and tones of the solar system, the note and tone of individuals, and the endeavor to harmonise the egoic note with that of others. When the egoic note is sounded in  harmony with other egos, the result is the shattering of the causal body, dissociation  from the lower and the attainment of perfection. Its exponents develop along the line  of music, rhythm and painting. They withdraw within in order to comprehend the life  side of the form. The outer manifestation of that life side in the world is through that  which we call art. The great painters and the superlative musicians are in many cases  reaching their goal that way. 
When the fifth ray, the Ray of Concrete Science or Knowledge is a man's ray, the  method is very interesting. It takes the form of the intense application of the concrete  mind to some problem for the helping of the race; it is the bending of every mental  quality and the [Page 18] controlling of the lower nature so that one supreme  endeavor is made to pierce through that which hinders the downflow of the higher  knowledge. It involves also the will element (as might be expected) and results in the  wresting of the desired information from the source of all knowledge. 
As the process is continued, the piercing of the periphery of the causal body becomes  so frequent that in the end disintegration is produced and a man is set free. It is 
mentality driving a man on to perfection and forcing him to utilise all knowledge in  the loving service of his race. 
The Ray of Devotion is pre-eminently the ray of sacrifice. When it is the egoic ray  the method of approach through meditation takes the form of one-pointed application,  through love of some individual or ideal. A man learns to include through love of  person or ideal; he bends every faculty and every effort to the contemplation of what  is required, and in sacrifice for that person or ideal lays even his causal body on the  flames of the altar. It is the method of divine fanaticism that counts all lost apart from  the vision, and that eventually sacrifices joyously the entire personality. The causal  body is destroyed through fire, and the liberated life streams upward to the spirit in  divine beatification. 
When the egoic ray is the seventh or Ray of Ceremony Law or Magic, the method is  that of the glorification and comprehension of form in approach. As said earlier, the  goal of all the meditation practices is approach to the divine within each one, and,  through that, approach to the Deity Himself. 
The method, therefore, is the bringing under law, order and rule, of every act of the  life in all the three bodies, and the building within the causal body of an [Page 19]  expanding form that results in the shattering of that body. It is the building of the  Shrine under certain rules into a dwelling place for the Shekinah, and when the  spiritual light flames forth, the Temple of Solomon rocks, reels and disintegrates. It is  the study of the law and the consequent comprehension by the man of how that law is  wielded and why; it is then the definite application of that law to the body of causes  so as to render it needless and thus effect its shattering. Emancipation is the result,  and the man frees himself from the three worlds. Many occultists are coming in on  this ray at this time to continue the liberating process. It is the method that leads a  man to liberation through the understanding and the intelligent application of the law  to his own life, and to the ameliorating of conditions in the body of humanity, thus  making the man a server of his race. 
This suffices for today. 
June 5, 1930. 
2—The Ray of the Personality. 
We have somewhat dealt with the first factor, the egoic ray, in determining the  method of meditation. Today we might take up the function of the personality ray in  determining this method. As you know, the personality ray is ever a sub-ray of the  spiritual ray and varies with greater frequency than the egoic ray. With evolved egos  such as may be contacted among the thinkers of the race and among the prominent  workers in all departments of world work everywhere, the personality ray may vary  from life to life, each life being based on a different note and demonstrating a  different colour. In this way the causal body is more rapidly equipped. When the  reincarnating unit has reached a point where he can consciously choose his mode of  expression, he [Page 20] will first review his past lives, and from the knowledge  gained thereby, he will guide his choice for the next. Prior to incarnation he will 
sound his egoic note and will note the lack of fullness or the discord it may contain;  he will then decide upon which note he will base his coming personality vibration. 
The whole life, therefore, may be given over to the sounding of a particular note and  to the stabilising of one particular vibration. This note must be sounded and this  vibration stabilised in diversity of circumstances. Hence the necessity in the life of  the aspirant or disciple for frequent change, and the explanation of the obvious  condition of variety and apparent chaos in which these lives are spent. 
When the discord has been corrected and when the vibration becomes steady and is  not subject to change, then the needed work is done. The Ego can call in again his  forces, prior to continuing the work of perfecting the causal body and carrying to  perfect accuracy and clarity of tone the desired chord. See then the necessity of  adapting the method of meditation to the need of the personality, and of synchronising  it at the same time with the first factor, involving the ray of the Ego. 
A practical illustration. 
Let me illustrate, if in any way I can elucidate the matter; accuracy of comprehension  is desired. 
We will assume that the egoic ray of A is that of the Love or Wisdom Ray, whilst the  ray of his lower self is that of the fifth or the Ray of Concrete Knowledge. A in past  lives has demonstrated love and has made real progress in the method of the synthetic  ray, that of expansion. He loves much and expands with fair facility his  consciousness to include a just part of his environing [Page 21] circumstances. But,  though of average intelligence, he lacks the stabilising vibration that attaches to the  fifth ray. He has not that concentration that forces results, and he needs the basic  foundation of facts before he can wisely and safely proceed much further. The wise  teacher, in apprehending this necessity, uses the method of expansion inherent in the  egoic ray and applies it to the expansion of the mental body. By a wisely adjudicated  method, he will apply the faculty of expansion (hitherto used only to include others  through love) to the one-pointed effort likewise to expand for the purpose of  apprehending knowledge. When this is done, every effort of the personal life may  apparently (in one particular incarnation) be given to the acquirement of scientific  position and to the development of mind. Intellectual progress may seem of too  paramount importance to the uninstructed onlooker; yet, after all, the work proceeds  as desired by the inner guide, and only the life succeeding will demonstrate the  wisdom of the egoic choice. 
Intellectual expansion by the combination of second ray methods with fifth ray  application will be achieved. Have I made this matter clear? I write for clarity for  this question of meditation is of much vital importance to many. 
It will, therefore, be clear to you on careful perusal, that as one knows more, one  judges less. A person may be well-developed on the love side, yet in some particular  incarnation that side may lie in abeyance, and the line of development most apparent  may be the purely intellectual. Reservation of opinion is the best line for the wise  onlooker to take, for he has not yet the inner vision that sees the colour, nor the occult  hearing that recognises the note.
[Page 22]  
June 7, 1920. 
3—The Karmic Condition of the Threefold Man. 
Today the karmic condition of the threefold man and his place in evolution comes up  for consideration under our discussion of "Methods of Meditation." It is our third  point and of real moment in deciding wisely upon a method suitable for the  individual. We have up till now considered first the importance of meditation; then  we touched briefly upon the part the egoic ray plays in deciding upon that method,  incidentally bringing out a point not much emphasized hitherto that the real goal of  meditation is the gradual fracturing, breaking and shattering of the egoic body. Each  ray necessitated, we saw, a different process. Then we took up the function of the  personality ray in combination with the egoic ray, and saw how in wise consideration  of the two factors a method could wisely be apportioned. 
Now we take up more specifically the factor of time. Karma and time are more  synonymous terms than is oft realised. Occult meditation and the definite  commencement of the work of liberating the individual from the periphery of the  causal body can only be begun when a certain point in evolution has been attained,  and when (through its content) the causal body is of a certain specific gravity, and  when the circumference of that body measures up to certain requirements. The whole  process is one of law and not, as is so oft considered, one purely of aspiration and  lofty desire. Consider wisely this sentence I have just written upon the karmic  condition of the threefold man and his place on the ladder of evolution. What have I  specified? Three factors for your consideration: 
[Page 23]  
a—The point in evolution. 
b—The specific gravity of the causal body. 
c—The size and circumference of the causal body. 
Later I intend definitely taking up with you the question of the mental plane and its  three higher subplanes, which are the planes of the Ego. We will deal with the  position of the causal body on these planes and with the relationship of the causal  body to other bodies on the same plane. In this letter I deal only with the three above mentioned points. I deal, therefore, with the causal body itself, with the egoic  consciousness and its relationship to the lower self. Later I will deal with the same  consciousness on its own plane and its relationship to other egos and to the Hierarchy.  Keep this clearly in mind:—the development of the egoic consciousness within the  Personality is my main theme at this time. Do not confuse the two. We might word it  otherwise:—I will deal with the relationship of the Higher Self to the threefold lower  man, and the gradually increasing strength of that relationship through meditation.  This increase is coincident with the three factors above named. Let us take them in  order. 
The Point in Evolution.
The life of the evolving personality might be divided into five divisions. Ours is, after  all, a fivefold evolution, and the life of the man (as a human being and prior to taking  the fifth Initiation) may be considered as a series of five gradual steps, each step being  gauged by the condition of the indwelling Flame of Spirit. From the standpoint of our  occult planetary Hierarchy, as before I have told you, we are measured by our light. 
The first division of progress might be measured from the moment when animal-man  became a thinking entity, [Page 24] a human being, to that of the conscious  functioning of the emotional body or to the point where the emotions are very largely  paramount. It corresponds to the period covered by the Lemurian and early Atlantean  days. During this period, the man is polarised in his physical body and is learning to  be controlled by his desire body, the body of feeling or of emotion. He has no  aspirations save such as pander to the pleasures of the body; he lives for his physical  nature, and has no thought for aught that may be higher. This period parallels that of  the child from one to seven years. At this time the watching Teachers of the race see  the indwelling Flame as a tiny pin-point, and the permanent atom of the physical  plane holds the polarisation. No attention is called for from the Teachers, for the  instinctive force inherent in the Higher Self does the work, and the driving force of  evolution carries all on to perfection. 
The second period covers a point in development when the polarisation is largely in  the emotional body and when lower mind desire is being developed. Later Atlantean  days hold the analogy hid. The desires are not so purely physical, for mind is  beginning to permeate, much as yeast causes a movement and a rising in a mass of  dough. The man is conscious of vague pleasures not associated with his physical  body; he is capable of a deep love for teachers and guides wiser than himself, of a  wild unreasoning devotion for his environing associates, and of an equally wild and  unreasoning hatred, for the equilibrium that mind achieves, and the balance that is the  result of mental action, is wanting in his make-up. He suffers from extremes. 
The polarisation lies now in the emotional permanent atom but, (when this point of  development is reached) a light plays between the two atoms that have [Page 25]  known polarisation—the emotional and the physical. What I am seeking to bring out  at this stage is that the mental unit has not known the force of polarisation, the  emotional is holding it, and the result is an integral difference within the periphery of  the atom itself. The electronic combinations that compose the atom which has  suffered polarisation are grouped in a different geometrical form to those which have  not yet experienced the process. It is the effect of the life of the Ego, playing on the  matter of the atom and causing various approximations and differentiations unseen in  a non-polarised atom. The matter is abstruse and complex. 
This period is an analogous one to that in the life of a child from seven to fourteen  years, or that period when adolescence is traversed and the child is maturing. This  maturity is the product of emotional and physical polarisation in alignment.  Alignment is now easily achieved between the physical and emotional bodies. The  problem is to bring both under alignment with the mental and later with the egoic  bodies. 
To the watching Guides of the race, the indwelling Flame or Light can be seen  slightly more enlarged, but still so small as to be inappreciable. But, if I can in any 
way make clear without misleading by the use of words—whereas in the first period  the physical atom could be seen illuminated, now in the second period the emotional  atom is similarly lit up, a signal to the Teachers that the work progresses. All this covers a vast period of time, for progress at this period is inexpressibly slow. My  allusion to the Atlantean and Lemurian races was but to trace analogy in object, and  not analogy in time. 
Now, on entering the third period, comes the most vital point in the development of  the man, that in which [Page 26] mind is developing and the polarising life shifts to  the mental unit. Speaking in terms of the solar system and viewing humanity as a  unit, all of whose permanent atoms form the molecules in a corresponding cosmic  atom, the work has progressed from physical to emotional polarisation and remains  there. Not till the seventh cycle of the greater cycle, not till the calling of the system  into obscuration and out of manifestation will the cosmic mental atom in the body of  the Logos achieve polarisation. Here and there individuals are, as units,  accomplishing the work and demonstrating therefore the hope for all. 
This period corresponds to that between the ages fourteen and twenty-eight. The  period here is longer for there is much to be done. Two atoms have felt polarisation,  and one is receiving the shifting. It is the middle point. At this time the light plays  between the three atoms (outlining the personality triangle). But the focal point is  gradually shifting more and more into the mental unit, and the egoic body is  becoming gradually more rounded out, and assuming its proportions. 
The man has control of the physical body and each life he builds a better; he has a  desire body of more refined requirements (note the occult significance of that word);  he realizes the joys of intellect and strives ever for a mental body of greater adequacy;  his desires turn upward instead of downward, and become transmuted into  aspiration,—at first aspiration towards the things of mind, and later towards that  which is more abstract and synthetic. The indwelling egoic Flame or Light now  radiates from an inner centre to the periphery, lighting the causal body and giving  indication of burning. To the on-looking Hierarchy it is apparent that the divine fire is  permeating and warming and radiating throughout [Page 27] the causal body., and  that the Ego is becoming ever more conscious on his own plane, and ever more  interested—via the permanent atoms,—in the life of the Personality. The physical  brain of the Personality is not yet aware of the difference between inherent mental  capacity and the directed impress of the indwelling Ego, but the time is becoming ripe  for a change of some kind, and evolution is moving with rapidity. The fourth period  approaches. I would here sound a warning. All this proceeds not in ordered sections,  if so I may term it. It proceeds as proceeds the greater system, with constant  overlapping. and with parallelism, due to the inherent ray of the spirit or Monad, to  cyclic changes, to diversity of forces playing astrologically and oft from unknown  cosmic centres upon the palpitating life within the atoms.... 
The fourth period is that within which co-ordination of the Personality is completed,  and that wherein the man comes to himself (as did the prodigal in the far country) and  says: "I will arise and go to my Father." This is the result of the first meditation. The  three permanent atoms are functioning and the man is an active, feeling, thinking entity. He reaches the consummation of the personality life and he begins to shift  consciously his polarisation from the personality life to the egoic. He stands upon the 
Path of Discipleship or Probation, or is close to it. He commences the work of  transmutation; he laboriously, painfully and carefully, forces his consciousness higher  and to expand at will; at any cost he determines to dominate and function in full  liberation on the three lower planes; he realises that the Ego must have perfect  expression,—physical, emotional and mental,—and he makes, therefore, at infinite  cost, the necessary channel. He attracts the attention of the Teachers. [Page 28] In  what way does he do this? The causal body begins to radiate the indwelling Light. It  has been constructed to a point where it is fine enough to act as a transparency and,  where the contact of the Ego is made with the Triad, a point of Flame appears....The  light is no longer under the bushel, but suddenly flames forth, and catches the eager  eye of the Master. 
This marks the period between twenty-eight and thirty-five in the life of the adult. It  is the period wherein a man finds himself, discovers what his line of activity may be,  what he can accomplish, and from the worldly standpoint, comes into his own. 
During the fifth period the Flame gradually breaks through the periphery of the causal  body, and the "path of the just shineth ever more and more unto the perfect day." It is  in the fourth period that meditation commences,—the mystic meditation that leads, in  the fifth period, to that occult meditation that brings about results, being under the law  and hence following the line of the ray. It is by meditation that the man—as a  
Personality—feels out the vibration of the Ego, and seeks to reach up to the Ego and  bring the egoic consciousness ever more and more down, so as to include consciously  the physical plane. It is by meditation or by retreating within that the man learns the  significance of Fire, and applies that fire to all the bodies, till naught is left save the  fire itself. It is by meditation, or the reaching from the concrete to the abstract, that  the causal consciousness is entered, and man—during this final period—becomes the  Higher self and not the Personality. 
The polarisation shifts during the fifth period (the period of the Path of Initiation)  entirely from the Personality to the Ego, until, at the close of that period, liberation is  complete, and the man is set free. Even the [Page 29] causal body is known as a  limitation and the emancipation is completed. The polarisation then shifts higher into  the Triad—the shifting beginning at the third Initiation. The physical permanent atom  goes and the polarisation becomes higher mental; the emotional permanent atom goes  and the polarisation becomes intuitional; the mental unit goes and the polarisation  becomes spiritual. The man then becomes a Master of the Wisdom and is of the  symbolic age of forty-two, the point of perfected maturity in the solar system. 
A still later period comes, corresponding to the ages forty-two to forty-nine, wherein  the sixth and seventh Initiations may be taken, but this period concerns not the readers  of these letters.... 
June 9, 1920. 
The Specific Gravity and Content of the Causal Body. 
This subject, anent the causal body, opens up for the thinker much food for  speculation. The literal figures and the dimensional lines cannot be given. They form 
one of the secrets of initiation but certain ideas may be suggested and submitted to the  consideration of all interested. 
Just what do you mean when you speak of the causal body? Say not glibly, the body  of causes, for words thus spoken are oft but nebulous and vague. Let us now consider  the causal body and find out its component parts. 
On the involutionary path you have what is termed the Group Soul, aptly described  (as far as earth words permit) as a collection of triads, enclosed in a triple envelop of  monadic essence. On the evolutionary path, groups of causal bodies correspond and  are similarly composed, three factors entering in. 
[Page 30]  
The causal body is a collection of permanent atoms, three in all, enclosed in an  envelop of mental essence.... What happens at the moment when animal-man  becomes a thinking entity, a human being? The approximation of the self and the not self by means of mind, for man is "that being in whom highest spirit and lowest  matter are linked together by intelligence." What do I mean by this phrase? Just this:  that when animal-man had reached a point of adequacy; when his physical body was  sufficiently co-ordinated, when he had an emotional or desire nature sufficiently  strong to form a basis for existence, and to guide it by means of instinct, and when the  germ of mentality was sufficiently implanted to have donated the instinctive memory  and correlation of ideas that can be seen in the average domesticated animal, then the  descending spirit (which had taken to itself an atom on the mental plane) judged the  time ripe for taking possession of the lower vehicles. The Lords of the Flame were  called in and they effected the transfer of polarisation from the lower atom of the  Triad to the lowest atom of the Personality. Even then, the indwelling Flame could  come no lower than the third subplane of the mental plane. The life of the first Logos  must be blended with that of the second Logos and based on the activity of the third  Logos. 
Therefore, you have at the moment of individualisation, which is the term used to  express this hour of contact, on the third subplane of the mental plane a point of light,  enclosing three atoms, and itself enclosed in a [Page 31] sheath of mental matter. The  work then to be done consists of: 
1. Causing that point of light to become a flame, by steadily fanning the spark and  feeding the fire. 
2. Causing the causal body to grow and expand from being a colourless ovoid,  holding the Ego like a yolk within the egg-shell, to a thing of rare beauty, containing  within itself all the colour of the rainbow. This is an occult fact. The causal body will  palpitate in due course of time with an inner irradiation, and an inner glowing flame  that will gradually work its way from the centre to the periphery. It will then pierce  through that periphery, using the body (that product of millennia of lives of pain and  endeavour) as fuel for its flames. It will burn all up, it will mount upward to the  Triad, and (becoming one with that Triad) will be re-absorbed into the spiritual  consciousness,—will carry with it—using heat as the symbol—an intensity of heat or  quality of colour or vibration that before were lacking.
Therefore the work of the Personality—for we have to view all from that angle until  egoic vision may be ours,—is first to beautify, build and expand the causal body;  secondly to withdraw within it the life of the Personality, sucking the good out of the  personal life and storing it in the body of the Ego. We might term this the Divine  Vampirism, for always evil is but the other side of good. Then, having accomplished  this, comes the application of the flame to the causal body itself and the joyous  standing by whilst the work of destruction goes on, and the Flame—the live inner  man and the spirit of divine life—is set free and mounts to its source. 
The specific gravity of the causal body fixes the moment of emancipation and marks  the time when the work of beautifying and building is completed, when the [Page 32]  Temple of Solomon is erected, and when the weight (occultly understood) of the  causal body measures up to the standard looked for by the Hierarchy. Then the work  of destruction supervenes and liberation approaches. Spring has been experienced,  the full verdure of summer has succeeded, now must be felt the disintegrating force of  autumn,—only this time it is felt and applied on mental levels and not on physical.  The axe is laid to the root of the tree, but the life essence is garnered into the divine  storehouse. 
The content of the causal body is the accumulation by slow and gradual process of the  good in each life. The building proceeds slowly at first, but towards the end of  incarnation—on the Probationary Path and on the Path of Initiation—the work  proceeds rapidly. The structure has been reared, and each stone quarried in the  personal life. On the Path, in each of its two divisions, the work of completing and  beautifying the Temple proceeds with greater rapidity.... 
Briefly and in conclusion of this matter, I would seek to point out that the  circumference of the causal body varies according to type and ray. Some egoic  bodies are of a form more circular than others; some are more ovoid, and others more  elongated in shape. It is the content and the pliability that matter, and above all the  occult permeability of the lower auric egg that permits of contact with other egos, yet  retains identity; that merges itself with its fellows, yet preserves individuality; and  that absorbs all that is desirable, yet keeps ever its own shape. 
June 16, 1920. 
4—Condition of the Causal Body. 
The fourth factor underlying the choice of a method [Page 33] of meditation is our  subject today and consists of the condition of the causal body. 
We have dealt with the causal body in its relationship to the Personality or lower self,  showing the interplay between the two and their interdependence. Through steady  application to occult meditation, and through the gradual stilling of the lower mind,  through concentration and the wise following of the egoic ray meditation, balanced by  the personality ray mediation, we found that the relationship of the causal body to the  Personality became ever closer and the channel connecting the two became ever more  clear and adequate. This resulted eventually, we saw, in a shifting of polarisation  from the lower to the higher and later to complete emancipation from both,— centralisation ensuing then in the spiritual consciousness. We dealt with the matter 
from the lower point of view, seeing it from the standpoint of a man in the three  worlds. 
Today we will deal with the matter from the standpoint of the Higher Self, from the  egoic level, and consider the relationship of that Self to the Hierarchy, to surrounding  egos, and to the Spirit. It will be difficult to do more than give some few hints, for  much that I could say would be little comprehended, and much be too occult and  dangerous for general communication. 
Three things may be imparted, which—when wisely meditated upon—may lead to  illumination: 
The Ego on its own plane, realises consciously its relationship to the Master, and  seeks to transmit that consciousness to the Personality. 
The Higher self on its own plane, is not trammeled by time and space, and (knowing  the future as well as that which is past) seeks to bring the desired end nearer and make  it more rapidly a fact. 
[Page 34]  
The Higher Self or Ego on its own plane has direct relationship with other egos on the  same ray, and on a corresponding concrete or abstract ray, and—realising that  progress is made in group formation—works on that plane at the helping of his kind.  These facts are already half apprehended among students but by a slight elaboration I  may make it clearer. 
Relationship of the Ego to the Hierarchy. 
The relationship of the Ego to some one Master is at this stage consciously realised,  but is nevertheless, itself of evolutionary development. As we have been told, there  are sixty thousand million units of consciousness or spirits in the evolving human  hierarchy. These are found on causal levels, though the numbers are slightly less  now, owing to the attainment of the fourth Initiation by individuals from time to time.  These egos at different stages of development are all linked with their Monad, Spirit  or Father in Heaven, in much the same way (only in finer matter) as the Ego is linked  with the Personality. 
All the Monads are, as you know, under the control, or rather form part, of the  consciousness of one of the Planetary Spirits. On egoic levels, the egos are in a  similar condition. An Adept of their ray supervises their general evolution, dealing  with them in groups. These groups are formed under three conditions: 
a—As to sub-ray of the egoic ray. 
b—As to period of individualisation or of entrance into the human kingdom. c—As to point of attainment. 
The Adept of their ray handles the general supervision but under Him work the  Masters each on His own ray, and with Their own individual groups, who are  affiliated with Them through period, through karma and [Page 35] through point of  vibration. Under the Masters work the disciples who have the consciousness of the 
Higher Self, and are therefore able to work on causal levels and aid in the  development of those egos whose causal bodies are less developed than their own. 
All is beautifully subject to law, and as the work of developing the egoic body is  dependent upon the progress made in the threefold personality, the Ego is  consequently aided on lower levels by two different disciples, one working on  emotional levels and reporting to another disciple who works upon the mental vehicle.  He in his turn reports to the disciple with causal consciousness, who reports again to  the Master. All this is done with the co-operation of the indwelling consciousness in  the causal body. This, as you see, entails five factors concerning themselves with the  aiding of the Ego in his evolutionary development: 
l—The Adept of his Ray. 
2—The Master of his group. 
3—A disciple with causal consciousness. 
4—A disciple on the mental plane. 
5—A helper on the emotional plane. 
For a long period of lives the Ego remains practically unconscious of the Personality.  The magnetic link exists. but that is all until the time comes when the personal life  reaches a point where it has somewhat to add to the content of the causal body—a  body at first small, colourless and insignificant. But the hour comes when the stones  are first brought perfected from the quarry of the personal life, and the first colours  are painted in by the man, the builder and the artist. Then the Ego begins to give  attention, rarely at first, but with increasing frequency, until lives come around in  which the Ego [Page 36] definitely works at the subjugation of the lower self, at the  enlargement of the communicating channel, and at the transmission to the physical  brain consciousness of the fact of its existence and the goal of its being. Once that is  accomplished, and the inner fire is freer in its passage, lives are then given to the  stabilising of that impression, and to the making of that inner consciousness a part of  the conscious life. The flame radiates downward more and more until gradually the  different vehicles come into line, and the man stands on the Probationary Path. He is  ignorant yet of what lies ahead, and is conscious only of wild and earnest aspiration  and of innate divine longings. He is eager to make good, longing to know, and  dreaming always of someone or something higher than himself. All this is backed by  the profound conviction that in service to humanity will the dreamed-of goal be  reached, will the vision become reality, the longing fructify into satisfaction, and  aspiration be merged in sight. 
The Hierarchy begins to take action and his instruction is carried out as aforesaid....  Until now the Teachers have only watched and guided without definitely dealing with  the man himself; all has been left to the Ego and the life divine to carry out the plan,  the attention of the Masters being directed to the Ego on his own plane. The Ego  bends every effort to quicken vibration, and to force the oft-rebelling lower vehicles  to respond and measure up to the rapidly increasing force. It is largely a matter of  increased fire or heat, and consequent intensification of vibratory capacity. The egoic  fire waxes ever greater until the work is done, and the purificatory fire becomes the  Light of Illumination. Ponder on this sentence. As above, so below; on each rung of  the ladder the process is repeated; the [Page 37] Monad, at the third Initiation, begins  itself to be conscious of the Ego. The work, then, is more rapid owing to the rarity of 
the material and to the fact that resistance is a factor in the three worlds but not  elsewhere. 
Hence, pain ceases for a Master. That is, pain as we know it on earth, which is largely  pain in matter. The pain that lies hid in comprehension, not resistance, is felt to the  highest circles, yea, it reaches to the Logos Himself. But this is beside the point and  well-nigh incomprehensible to you who are yet trammelled by matter. 
Relationship of the Ego to its own development. 
The Ego seeks to bring about the desired end in three ways:— 
1—By definite work on abstract levels. It aspires to contact and enclose the  permanent atom, its first direct approach to the Triad. 
2—By definite work on colour and sound with the aim in view of stimulation and  vivification, working thus in groups and under the guidance of a Master. 
3—By frequent attempts to definitely control the lower self, a thing distasteful to the  Ego, whose tendency is to rest content with consciousness and aspiration on its own  plane. Forget not that the Ego itself has somewhat to wrestle with. The refusal to  incarnate is not found only on spiritual levels, but is found also on that of the Higher  Self. Certain developments also, incidental to the factors of time and space (as  understood in the three worlds) are aimed at by the Ego, such as the increase of the  causal periphery through the study of divine telepathy, systemic psychology and the  knowledge of the law of fire. 
[Page 38]  
Relationship of the Ego to other egos. 
Certain things need to be remembered:— 
The factor of periodicity. Egos that are in incarnation, and egos that are out of  incarnation are differentiated and capable of different work. Egos whose reflections  are in incarnation are more limited than those who are not. It is almost as if the  Higher Self were directed downwards, or willingly circumscribing itself to three dimensioned existence, whereas the egos out of incarnation are not so limited but  work in another direction or dimension. The difference lies in the focusing of  attention, during physical plane life. The matter is hard for you to grasp, is it not so?  I scarcely know how to express the difference more clearly. It is perhaps as if the  incarnating egos were more positive, and the non-incarnating egos more negative. 
The factor of activity. This is largely a matter of ray, and affects closely the  relationship between egos. Those on similar rays coalesce and vibrate more readily to  each other than those on different rays, and it is only as the second or wisdom aspect  is developed that synthesis becomes possible. 
On the third subplane of the mental plane egos are separated into groups—individual  separation exists not, but group separation can be felt, incidental to ray and point in  evolution.
On the second subplane the groups become merged and blend, and from their forty nine groups are formed (by merging) forty-two. The process of synthesis might be  tabulated as follows: 
(1st subplane 35 groups, 7 x 5 
Mental plane (2nd subplane 42 groups, 7 x 6 
(3rd subplane 49 groups, 7 x 7 
[Page 39]  
(3rd subplane 28 groups, 7 x 4 
Buddhic plane (1st subplane 21 groups, 7 x 3 
Atmic plane Atomic subplane 14 groups, 7 x 2 
Monadic plane7 great groups 
I have given a few hints here. It is so little, compared with what will later be known  when those of you now studying expand the consciousness still further, but it is all I  can as yet impart, and only this has been given with the intent of showing how much  
has to be considered, when meditation forms are duly set by a Master. He has to take  into wise consideration the egoic ray, and the condition of the causal body in its  relationship to the lower self and to the Hierarchy. The state of the body must be  known, and its content; its relationship to other egos must be duly considered, for all  is in group formation. Meditation must therefore be given which is in line with the  group to which the Ego is assigned, for as each man meditates he contacts not only his  own Ego but also his egoic group, and through that group the Master to Whom he is  consequently linked, though the efficacy of a meditation depends upon the work being  done in an occult manner and under law. The group significance of meditation is little  understood, but the above thoughts are commended to you for your wise study. 
June 17, 1920 
5—Immediate Need of Period and Man's Availability. 
Today we will consider factor five in deciding methods of Meditation, and will deal  with the need of the particular period and the suitability of the man to meet the need. 
Let us first of all briefly recapitulate, for the value of reiteration is profound. We have  taken up briefly the [Page 40] factor of the egoic ray, as it is considered by a teacher  in assigning a meditation, and we have seen how each ray aimed at the same goal  along a different route, and that each ray necessitated a different type of meditation.  We have touched on the modification of the meditation through consideration of the  personality ray. Then we took up the factor of time as shown in the causal body, its  point of development, and the relationship of that body to its three lower expressions,  finishing yesterday with a few brief hints anent the causal body on its own level and  its scope of consciousness. All this will have indicated to you how wise must be the  teacher who presumes to indicate meditation. One point I would here interpolate:— No meditation that is truly and occultly suitable can be assigned by a teacher who has  not the capacity of causal consciousness and contact. When the teacher knows the 
note, the rate of vibration and the colour, then he can wisely assign, but not before.  Before that time, generalisation only is possible, and a meditation given that may  approximate the need and also be safe. 
Another factor enters now,—a factor that varies somewhat according to the need of  the period. All cycles are not as fundamentally important. The periods in a cycle that  are of real moment are the termini, and those where overlapping and merging occur.  They demonstrate on the physical plane in great revolutions, gigantic cataclysms, and  fundamental upheavals in all three departments of the Hierarchy,—the department of  the World Teacher, that of the Head of a root-race and that of the Ruler of civilisation  or of force. At the points of merging in a cycle, cross-currents are found, and all the  system seems to be in a chaotic condition. The middle part of a cycle where the  incoming vibration is stabilised and the [Page 41] old has passed away, manifests in a  period of calm and apparent equilibrium. 
At no time in the history of the race has this been better shown than in the present half  century. The sixth Ray of Devotion passes away and the Ray of Ceremonial Law  enters and with that entering comes a swinging into prominence of the outstanding  features and faculties of the department of force and activity, the synthesis, forget not,  of the four minor rays. Therefore you have the fighting for ideals and the devoted  adherence to a cause, as demonstrated under the ray of the Master Jesus; therefore the  clashing in every field of endeavor of the idealists (right or wrong) and their bitter  warfare. What was the world war but the culmination of two opposing ideals, fighting  it out on the physical plane?—it was an instance of the force of the sixth ray. Now  will come, as the sixth ray passes out, a gradual cessation of the clashing, and the  gradual domination of organisation, rule and order under the sway of the incoming  force, that of the ray of the Master R—. Out of the present turbulence will arise the  ordered and organised form of the new world. Gradually the new rhythm will impose  itself on the disorganised communities of men, and instead of social chaos as now you  will have social order and rule; instead of the religious differences and the  differentiated sects of the many so-called religions, you will have religious expression  itself regulated into form and all ordered by law; instead of economic and political  strain and stress will be seen the harmonious working of the system under certain  fundamental forms; all will be dominated by ceremonial with the inner results aimed  at by the Hierarchy gradually taking shape. Forget not that in the apotheosis of law  and order and their resultant forms and limitations lies, towards the close (I choose  my words with deliberation), a [Page 42] fresh period of chaos, and the escape of the  imprisoned life from even those limitations, bearing with it the imparted faculty and  the essence of the development aimed at by the Logos of the seventh ray. 
Such is the situation from time to time down through the ages. Each ray sweeps into power, bearing its own incarnating spirits to whom the period marks a point of least  resistance comparatively. They contact six other types of force in the worlds and six  
other groups of beings who must be impressed by that force and be carried forward in  its sweep towards the universal goal. Such is also the specific situation in the period  in which you live, a period wherein the seventh Logos of Ceremonial Law and Order  seeks to straighten out the temporary chaos, and aims at the reduction within limits of  
the life escaping from the old and worn-out forms. The new forms are needed now  and will be adequate. It is only after the middle period in a new cycle that limitation  will again be felt and the attempt to escape be started anew.
Therefore the wise teacher at this time considers the situation and weighs the effect of  the incoming ray on the spirits in incarnation. Here, therefore, you have a third ray  and its bearing to be considered in the assigning of meditation. Complex you feel the  task to be? Fortunately the Hall of Wisdom equips its graduates for the task. 
At this particular period the aspect of the Form in meditation (whether meditation  based principally on the egoic ray or on the personality ray) will be much developed.  You can look to see very definite forms built up and assigned, both to individuals and  to groups, resulting in an increase of white magic, and the consequent resultant, on the  physical plane, of law and order. The coming period of reconstruction goes forward  in line with the ray, and its ultimate success and achievement is more nearly [Page 43]  possible than perhaps is looked for. The Great Lord comes in under the law and  naught can stop His approach. 
Just now the great need of the time is for those who understand the law and can work  with it. Now is the opportunity, too, for the development of that principle and the  training of people in the helping of the world. 
The minor Rays of Harmony and Science respond quickly to this seventh influence;  by that statement I mean that their monads are easily influenced in this direction. The  monads of the sixth Ray of Devotion find conformity more difficult, until nearing the  point of synthesis. The monads of the first and second rays find in this ray a field of  expression. First ray monads have a direct link with this ray and seek to wield the law  through power, whilst second ray monads, being the synthetic type, guide and rule  through love. 
I think I have today given you enough to engender thought on this fifth factor. This is all I seek to do. To the guiding light of the intuition is the rest left and what that inner  guide reveals is of more value to the individual than aught exoterically imparted.  Therefore, ponder and consider. 
June 18, 1920 
Some Words of Cheer. 
......It is only as the disciple is willing to relinquish all in the service of the Great One,  and to hold naught back, that liberation is achieved, and the body of desire becomes  transmuted into the body of the higher intuition. It is the serving perfectly each day— with no thought or calculation about the future—that brings a man to the position of  the perfect Server. And, may I suggest one thing? All care and anxiety is based  primarily on selfish motive. You fear further pain, you shrink from further [Page 44]  sad experience. It is not thus that the goal is reached; it is reached by the path of  renunciation. Perhaps it may mean the renunciation of joy, or the renunciation of  good reputation, or the renunciation of friends, and the renunciation of all that the  heart clings to. I say perhaps; I say not, it is so. I but seek to point out to you that if  that is the way you are to reach your goal, then for you it is the perfect way. Aught  that brings you rapidly to Their Presence and to Their Lotus Feet, is by you to be  desired and eagerly welcomed.
Cultivate daily, therefore, that supreme desire that seeks solely the commendation of  the inner Guide and Teacher, and the egoic response to good action dispassionately  performed. 
Should bereavement come your way, smile through it all; it will end in a rich reward  and the return of all that has been lost. Should scorn and despisings be your lot, smile  still, for only the look of commendation that comes from the Master is the one to seek.  Should lying tongues take action, fear not, but forge ahead. A lie is a thing of earth  and can be left behind as a thing too vile to be touched. The single eye, the unalloyed  desire, the consecrated purpose, and the ear that turns in deafness to all earth's noise— such is the aim for the disciple. I say no more. I but desire that you do not dissipate  needless force in vain imaginings, feverish speculations and troubled expectations. 
6—The Groups, Inner and Outer, with which the Pupil is Affiliated. 
The point for consideration today is of practical interest. It deals with the factor of a  man's groups. The relationship to a Master we have somewhat considered, [Page 45]  and I will therefore proceed with the instruction on the group connection. 
We showed yesterday the importance of meditation in connection with the group to  which a man is allied on egoic levels. Today we deal with the group to which he may  be called on earth. This group is not exactly a reflection of the group on egoic levels  as might be anticipated, for only certain units of an egoic group will be in incarnation  at any one time. We deal with the Law of Cause and Effect, as demonstrated in the  groups national, religious or family. 
Four groups connected with the pupils. 
A man, when in incarnation, has four sets of people to consider as his group:— 
1. The big national group to which he belongs, the karma of which (through  aggregation of numbers) is so strong that he cannot break away from it even if he will.  Certain racial characteristics, certain temperamental tendencies are his because they  are hidden in the racial physical body, and he must carry that constitution, and the  tendencies inherent in that particular type of body, throughout his life on earth. That  body provides the needed lesson, or (as evolution proceeds) it provides the best body  for the type of work that has to be accomplished. An oriental type of body has one set  of qualifications, and an occidental body has another set, and equally good, if I might  so express it. I seek here to make this point clear, for the tendency of the westerner is  to ape the oriental and to endeavor to force his vibrations to the same key as that of  the oriental. At times, this causes concern to the inner Teachers, and occasionally  leads to trouble in the vehicles. 
[Page 46]  
There has been too much tendency to believe that to be an oriental holds the goal for  all. Forget not that even the Great Ones Themselves are not all orientals, and the  Masters in European bodies are of equal accomplishment to the better known Eastern  Adepts. Ponder on this. It needs much wise consideration, hence my emphasis of the  fact. When more is known along these lines, and when schools of meditation are  founded and conducted on truly occult lines by graduated Teachers, forms of 
meditation will he planned, suited to nationality and to the temperamental differences  existing among nations. Each nation has its virtues and each has its defects; it will  therefore be the work of the superintending Teacher to apportion meditations that will  intensify the virtues and remedy the defects. The field opened up by these ideas is so  vast that I cannot deal with it here. Specialists will later take up the problem, and the  time comes when the orient and the occident will each have their own schools, subject  to the same basic rules and under the superintendence of the same inner Teachers, but  wisely differing on certain points, and (though aiming at the same goal) following  different routes. You will later see these schools founded in each nation; admission  into them will not be easy of attainment, but each applicant for instruction will be  subjected to a drastic entrance examination. You will find each school will differ  somewhat, not in fundamentals but in methods of application, due to the wise  discrimination of the Head of the school. This Head, being of the same nationality as  the pupils, and having the faculties of the causal body fully developed, will apply the  method to the immediate need. 
Later I may further expand the future of the meditation schools for your edification,  but I seek now principally to generalise.  
[Page 47]  
2—The second group, which is of importance in the life of the pupil, is his family  group, involving its special family heredity and characteristics. Every man, who has  reached a point in evolution where occult meditation is desirable and possible, has  entered some particular family from deliberate choice:— 
a—To work off karma as rapidly as may be. 
b—Because of the physical vehicle it provides. 
You will easily see, therefore, that in the assigning of occult meditation to be carried  out on the physical plane and in a physical vehicle, it will be the concern of the  Teacher to know somewhat of the physical pedigree and the inherent characteristics of  the pupil, both from the point of view of finding the line of least resistance and of  demonstrating what must be overcome. (Some of you who meditate are apt to be so  engrossed straining after intuitional consciousness that you overlook the very  necessary physical vehicles.) The physical brain and the conformity of the head play  a large part in the process and must not be overlooked in the future as they are at  present. This is necessarily so, for the dearth of trained teachers in the physical  bodies is so insuperable at present. 
Therefore the family group is the second thing of moment that enters into  consideration, and the matter is of more vital importance than perhaps you think. 
In the coming schools of meditation there will be records kept as to the pupil's  forbears, his family history, the progress of his youth and life and his medical history.  This record will be minutely accurate, and much will be learnt this way. The life will  be regulated and the scientific purification of the physical body will be one of the  [Page 48] first things attempted. Incidentally (in speaking of these schools) I would  like to urge that you picture not some isolated spot for their location. In the world, yet  not of the world is the ideal, and only in the advanced stages or just prior to taking 
Initiation will the pupil be permitted to retire for periods of any length. It is the inner  detachment that counts, and the ability to dissociate the self from the environment that  matters, and not so much the physical plane isolation. 
3—The third group that a man has to consider is the particular band of servers to  which he may be affiliated. Any man who is ready for occult meditation must have  demonstrated first for many lives his intelligent willingness to serve and to work  among the sons of men. Unselfish service is the bed-rock of the life of the occultist,  and danger lurks when it exists not, and occult meditation carries a menace. Hence,  the man must be an active worker in some part of the field of the world, and on the  inner planes he must likewise be playing his part. Certain things will then have to be  considered by the Teacher: 
a—The group work a man is doing and how best he may be qualified to serve better  in that group. 
b—The type of a man's work, and his relationship in that work to his associates—a  very important occult factor—will be carefully weighed before a meditation is  assigned, and certain types of meditation (perhaps desired by the man himself) may be  withheld on account of their being unsuited to the work in hand, and because of their  tendency to develop certain qualities which might handicap the server in his work.  Those meditations which [Page 49] will increase ability to serve will ever be the aim.  The greater aim includes, after all, the lesser. 
4—The fourth group that has a place in the calculations of the Teacher is that to  which a man belongs on the inner plane, the band of helpers to which he is assigned,  or—if he is a disciple,—the group of pupils of which he forms a part. Their particular  type of group work will be considered, the capacity of the pupil to progress with his  fellows will be fostered, and his ability to fill his appointed post will be increased. 
I have but hinted in these last few communications at the many things that arise for  consideration in the assignment of a meditation. You have three rays to consider, the  point in evolution of the causal body and its interrelation on its own plane with its  group, with the Hierarchy and with its reflection, the Personality. You have also the  factor of karma, the need of the time and of the man himself, and his relationship with  four different groups. 
All this is possible and will some day be recognized, but the period of laying a  foundation is not yet over, and for long will remain with you. The control of the mind  is the present aim of meditation, and must always be the elementary step. 
[Page 50]  
LETTER IV - THE USE OF THE SACRED WORD IN MEDITATION LETTER IV 
THE USE OF THE SACRED WORD IN MEDITATION.
l—Fundamental postulates. 
2—The creative effect of the Sacred Word. 
3—The destructive effect of the Sacred Word. 
4—Pronunciation and use of the Sacred Word. 
5—Its effect on the centres and on each body. 
[Page 51]  
LETTER IV 
THE USE OF THE SACRED WORD IN MEDITATION. 
June 19, 1920 
The subject that we are to deal with today is of such profundity and of such vital  moment that your shrinking from even considering it is exceedingly natural. No  matter what we may say upon the matter, we can but touch the fringe of it, and the  depths of what will be left unsaid may seem so great, that the data communicated may  assume too small proportions. 
Fundamental Postulates. 
First, I seek to lay down certain basic postulates which, though realised as mental  concepts, may yet be too deep for easy comprehension. 
These postulates are five in number—five out of a number too vast for your  apprehension. These postulates themselves are based on certain fundamental facts,  and these facts (seven in number) are not as yet all comprehended. H.P.B. touched on  three in his statement of the fundamentals of the Secret Doctrine. Four yet remain  hid, though the fourth is emerging somewhat through the study of psychology and  mental science. The other three fundamentals will emerge during the next three  rounds. This round will see the apprehension of the fourth fundamental. 
These postulates are as follows: 
l—That all that exists is based on sound or on the Word. 
2—That differentiation is the result of sound. 
3—That on each plane the Word has a different effect. 
[Page 52]  
4—That according to the note of the Word, or the vibration of the sound, will the  work of building-in or casting-out be accomplished. 
5—That the one threefold Word has seven keys, and these seven keys have their own  subtones. 
In the apprehension of these basic facts lies hid much light on the use of the Word in  meditation.
In the great original sounding forth of the Sacred Word (the three original Breaths,  with their seven sounds,—one Breath for each of the three solar systems) the note was  different, and the sounds pitched to a different key. 
In system one, the completion of the First Breath, the culmination, was the sounding  forth, in note majestic, of the note FA,—the note which forms the basic note of this  system, the note of manifested nature. This note is, and to it must be supplemented  the second note for this the second system. It is not fully sounded or rounded out, nor  to the end of the greater cycle will it be completed. The Logos sounds it now, and  should He cease to breathe it forth, the whole system would disappear into complete  obscuration. It would mark the end of manifestation. 
In system two, the present system, the keynote may not be disclosed. It is one of the  secrets of the sixth Initiation, and must not he revealed. 
In system three the final third note will be added to the basic notes of the first and  second systems, and then what will you have? You will have the major third of the  Logoic Personality in its completeness, a correspondence to the major third of the  microcosm,—one note for each plane. We have been told that the solar Logos, on the  cosmic planes, works at the problem of cosmic mind; that He functions in His  physical solar system, is polarised in His cosmic astral, or emotional body, and is  developing [Page 53] cosmic mind. So, on the planes of the solar system, is it as with  the microcosm. In the realisation of this correspondence and its wise application lies  illumination on the use of the Sacred Word in meditation. 
System I........corresponds to the physical body. 
System II.......corresponds to the emotional body. 
System III......corresponds to the mental body. 
By the study of the Word or Sound in the formation of these three will help come on  the use of that Word in the building of the intuitional vehicle, and the purification of  the personality. 
Now we will divide what we have to say under four heads, and take up each one of  them separately:— 
l—The creative effect of the Sacred Word. 
2—The destructive effect of the Sacred Word. 
3—Its pronunciation and use:— 
a—In individual meditation. 
b—In group and congregational work. 
c—For certain specific ends. 
4—Its effect on the bodies and centres, and its efficacy in effecting egoic alignment. June 20, 1920 
The Dual Effect of the Sacred Word; constructive and destructive.
We can today continue with the subject we were considering yesterday. We divided  the theme into four divisions and we will take the first two, the effect,—creative and  destructive—of the Word. Just a few broad hints will be possible, to form a basis for  the intelligent application of the law. 
First, let us repeat the truism that the worlds are the effect of sound. First life, then  matter; later the attraction [Page 54] of the matter to the life for purposes of its  manifestation and expression, and the orderly arrangement of that matter into the  necessary forms. Sound formed the allying factor, the propelling impulse, and the  attractive medium. Sound, in an occult and deeply metaphysical sense, stands for that  which we term "the relation between", and is the creating intermediary, the linking  third factor in the process of manifestation. It is the akasha. On the higher planes it is  the agent of the great Entity Who wields the cosmic law of gravitation in its relation  to our solar system, whilst on the lower planes it demonstrates as the astral light, the  great agent of reflection, that fixes and perpetuates on its vibratory bosom the past, the  present and the future, or that which we call Time. In direct relation to the lower  vehicle it manifests as electricity, prana and the magnetic fluid. A simplification of  the idea may come to you perhaps in the recognition of sound as the agent of the law  of attraction and repulsion. 
The seven great Breaths. 
In sounding forth the Sacred Word in its sevenfold completeness for this solar system,  the Logos gathered through inspiration the matter needed for manifestation, and  started the evolution of that matter at the first great Breath. 
At the second great Breath came differentiation and the instilling of the second aspect  logoic. 
At the third great Breath the activity aspect was demonstrated, matter was  impregnated with that faculty, and fivefold evolution became a possibility. 
At the fourth great Breath certain of the Hierarchies responded, and the great Builders  more clearly saw the plan. There is a definite connection between the fourth [Page  55] Breath and the fourth Creative Hierarchy, that of the human Spirits. This fourth  note of the Logos has a special significance for the human Spirit, and an unique effect  in this earth and in this fourth cycle. The relativity of it is such that it is difficult for  you in any way to realise that effect. It demonstrates as far as you can grasp it in the  harmonic note of the fourth plane and ray. That note permeates the peoples of the  world at this time and ever since the fourth root-race. It shows itself in the struggle of  humanity to grasp the ideal of harmony and peace, and in the worldwide aspiration in  that direction. 
This fourth Breath is especially applicable to human evolution. 
You have therefore: 
Subtone one of the threefold Word gave the first vibratory note and started the  movement of the spheres—solar or atomic. It embodies Will.
Subtone two of the threefold Word instilled the second aspect and called the cosmic  ruler of the synthetic ray into manifestation. It marked duality or reflex love. 
Subtone three of the threefold Word made our fivefold evolution possible. It is the  basic note of the five lower planes. It marked activity or adaptability. 
Subtone four of the threefold Word is the sound of the Human Hierarchy, and in its  entirety might be called the "cry of Man." 
Each of the sounds directly called into manifestation one ray, with all that enters in on  a ray. Each sound demonstrates particularly on one plane, being the dominant note of  that plane. 
The fifth great Breath has an effect peculiar to itself, for in its reverberation it holds  the key to all,—it is the Breath of fire. It created a similar vibration to that of the  cosmic mental level, and is closely allied with the [Page 56] first Breath. It is the  dominant note (in technical musical terminology) of the solar system, just as the third  Breath corresponds to the major third. It is the note of the Logos. Each breath  attracts to the Logos for purposes of manifestation, some entity on cosmic levels. The  reflection of the method can be seen in the microcosm when the Ego sounds the egoic  note in the three worlds and prepares to manifest or to come into incarnation. The  note attracts around the permanent atoms or nuclei adequate matter for the purpose of  manifestation, and that matter is itself informed by some vital entity. Similarly, the  cosmic Lords of Fire, the great informing Entities of our solar system, respond when  this fifth subtone is sounded forth. Again, the Lords of the Flame within the solar  system itself responded when the microcosm sounded the fifth subtone of the monadic  note, and involved themselves in human evolution. 
The sixth great Breath drew to itself the Lords of the mysterious Pentacle, the volatile  essences of the emotional plane, the desire faculty clothed in matter, the watery aspect  of the logoic life. 
At the sounding of the seventh subtone crystallisation occurred and absolute  conformity to the law of approach. It resulted in the dense aspect of manifestation,  the point of deepest experience. You will note its connection, therefore, with the Ray  of Ceremonial Law, one of the great building rays,—a ray which adjusts matter, under  set forms, to the desired shapes. 
You may ask here: Why have I thus apparently digressed? It seems to you wide of  the mark and beside the question? Let me elucidate. The microcosm has but to repeat  the work of the macrocosm. The Spirit or monad on his own plane sounds forth the note (his hierarchical note) and descends into incarnation. It is both [Page 57] the  note of attraction and of out-breathing. The personality—the reflection of that monad  at the densest point in evolution,—is linked to the monad by the attractive force of the  Sacred Word sounded by its monad on its note and on its own subtone. 
But the work of outbreathing is already accomplished. It is involution. The work of  in-breathing or reabsorption into the source progresses. When the Personality finds  for itself (after lives of stress and search) its spiritual note with the right key and  subtone, what is the result? It accords with its monadic note, it vibrates to the same 
measure, it pulsates with the same colour, the line of least resistance is at last found,  and the indwelling life is liberated and. returns to its own plane. But this work of  discovery is very slow and the man has to pick out the chord with infinite care and  pains. First, he finds out the third of the Personality and sounds that forth, the result  being an ordered harmonious life in the three worlds. Then he finds the dominant  fifth of the Ego, the keynote of the chord, and sounds that in unison with the  Personality note. The result is that a vacuum is formed (if I may so express it) and the  liberated man with his informing soul,—the threefold spirit, plus mind and  experience—the Three completed by the Quaternary and the Fifth, escapes upward to  the Monad. It is the law of attraction demonstrating through sound. Like to like and  kind to kind, driven thereto by unity of sound, of colour and of rhythm. 
This leads to the second factor we are considering, the destructive factor. In  emancipation comes the breaking of the chains, in liberation comes the abolition of  the old forms, in the domination of matter is seen the liberation of spirit. So, in the  sounding of the Sacred Word in its sevenfold sense, comes the escaping from the  shattered [Page 58] forms; first in the out-breathing, the attraction of matter, then in  the in-breathing, the gradual shattering of the material forms and the leaving of them  behind. 
Meditation and the Word. 
I have pictured this for you on the systemic scale. Now let me apply it to meditation  and see how it will work. Man, when meditating, aims at two things:— 
a—At the formation of thoughts, at the bringing down to the concrete levels of the  mental plane, of abstract ideas and intuitions. This is what might be termed  meditation with seed. 
b—At the aligning of the ego, and at the creation of that vacuum betwixt the physical  brain and the Ego, which results in the divine outpouring, and the consequent  shattering of the forms and subsequent liberation. This might be termed meditation  without seed. 
At a certain period in evolution the two blend, the seed is dropped and the vacuum is  then created, not so much between the higher and the lower vehicles as between them  and the intuitional plane or the plane of harmony. 
Therefore, in the sounding of the Sacred Word in meditation man should (if rightly  sounding it forth) be able to do both the creative work and the destructive work as  does the Logos. It will be the reflection in the microcosm of the cosmic process. He  will attract to his bodies matter of the finer kind and cast out that which is coarser. He  will formulate thoughtforms that attract to themselves finer matter and repudiate that  which is of a lower vibration. He should so sound the Word that alignment will [Page  59] be automatically made, and the necessary vacuum created, eventuating in a  downflow from above. All these effects can transpire when the Word is correctly  intoned, and each meditation should see the man more aligned, should disperse some  of the matter of low vibration in one or other of his bodies, should open up the  channel to a greater extent, and so provide a more adequate vehicle for the  illumination from higher levels.
But—until correctness is possible—the effect produced by the use of the Word is very  little, which is fortunate for the man who uses it. In the studying of the seven great  Breaths and their effect on each plane, a man can find out much that should transpire  on the different subplanes of each plane, especially in relation to his own  development. In the studying of the basic note of the solar system (which was  stabilised in System I), much can be found out about the use of the Word on the  physical plane. A hint lies here for consideration. In the endeavour to find the note  for this solar system, the note of love and wisdom, the student will make the  necessary communication between the emotional or desire plane and the intuitional  plane, and find out the secret of the emotional plane. In the study of the Word on  mental levels and its effect in form building, the key to the erection of Solomon's  Temple will be discovered, and the pupil will develop the faculties of the causal body,  and eventually find liberation from the three worlds. 
The student must remember, nevertheless, that he has first to find his personality note,  and then the egoic, before he can touch the monadic chord. When he has done that he  has, for himself, sounded his own threefold Word, and is now an intelligent creator  animated by love. The goal is reached. 
June 21, 1920 
Some Practical Hints. 
I wish to make clear this afternoon that it is not possible for me, nor wise and  appropriate to give to you different keys in which the sacred Word can be intoned; I  can do no more than indicate general principles. Each human being, each unit of  consciousness, is so unlike any other that the individual need can only be supplied  when full causal consciousness exists on the part of the teacher, and when the pupil  has himself reached a point where he is willing to know, to dare and to be silent. The  dangers involved in the misuse of the Word are so great that we dare do no more than  indicate basic ideas and fundamental principles, and then leave the aspirant to work  out for himself the points necessary for his own development and to carry out the  needed experiments until he finds for himself that which he needs. Only that which is  the result of self-effort, of hard struggle and of bitter experience is of permanent and  lasting value. Only as the disciple—through failure, through success, through hardly  won victories, and the bitter hours that succeed defeat—adjusts himself to the inner  condition, will he find the use of the Word scientifically and experimentally of value.  His lack of will defends him largely from the misuse of the Word, whilst his  endeavour to love guides him eventually to its correct intoning. Only that which we  know for ourselves becomes inherent faculty. The statements of a teacher, no matter  how profoundly wise he may be, are but mental concepts until experimentally part of  a man's life. Hence, I can but point the way. I may give but general hints; the rest  must be threshed out by the student of meditation for himself. 
[Page 61]  
Pronunciation and Use in Individual Meditation. 
I shall now be very practical. I speak for the man on the Probationary Path, who has  therefore an intellectual grasp of what has to be accomplished. He realises 
approximately his place in evolution and the work to be done if he would some day  pass through the portal of Initiation. In this way what I will say will teach the  majority who study these letters........The man undertakes to meditate and seeks to  conform to the necessary rules. Let me give a few preliminary hints:— 
The aspirant seeks daily a quiet spot where he can be free from interference and  interruption. If wise, he will always seek the same spot, for he will there build up a  shell around it that will serve as a protection and make the desired higher contact  more easy. The matter of that spot, the matter of what you might term the  surrounding space, becomes then attuned to a certain vibration (the man's own highest  vibration, reached in consecutive meditations) which makes it easier for him each  time to start at his highest and so eliminate a long preliminary keying up. 
The aspirant composes himself to a position in which he can be unconscious of his  physical body. No hard and fast rules can be laid down as the physical vehicle itself  has here to be considered,—it may be handicapped in some way, stiff or crippled.  Ease of posture is to be aimed at, coupled with alertness and attention. Slothfulness  and laxness lead a man nowhere. The position most suitable for the average is cross legged upon the ground, sitting against something that affords support to the spine. In  intensest meditation or when the aspirant is very proficient and the centres rapidly  awakening (perhaps even the inner fire pulsating at the base of the spine) [Page 62]  the back should be erect without support. The head should not be thrown back as  tension is to be avoided, but it should be held level, or with the chin slightly dropped.  When this is done, that tenseness that is the characteristic of so many will be gone and  the lower vehicle will be relaxed. The eyes should be closed and the hands folded in  the lap. 
Then let the aspirant note if his breathing is regular, steady and uniform. Should this  be so, let him then relax his entire person, holding the mind positive and the physical  vehicle supple and responsive. 
Then let him visualize his three bodies, and having decided whether his meditation  shall be in the head or within the heart (I will later take up this point) let him  withdraw his consciousness there and focus himself in one or other of the centres. In  so doing let him deliberately realise that he is a Son of God, returning to the Father;  that he is God Himself, seeking to find the God-consciousness which is His; that he is  a creator, seeking to create; that he is the lower aspect of Deity seeking alignment  with the higher. Then let him three times intone the sacred Word, breathing it forth  gently the first time and thereby affecting the mental vehicle; more loudly the second  time, thereby stabilising the emotional vehicle; and in a still louder tone the final time,  acting then upon the physical vehicle. The effect upon each body will be threefold. If  correctly chanted with the centre of consciousness steadily held within whichever  centre has been chosen, the effect will be as follows: 
On Mental Levels: 
a—The contacting of the head centre, causing it to vibrate. The stilling of the lower  mind. 
[Page 63] 
b—Linking up with the Ego to a more or less degree, but always to some extent  through the permanent atom. 
c—The driving out of coarse particles and the building in of finer. On Emotional Levels: 
a—The definite stabilisation of the emotional body through the permanent atom, and  the contacting and setting in motion of the heart centre. 
b—The driving out of coarse matter and the rendering of the emotional or desire body  more colourless, so that it will be a true reflector of the higher. 
c—It causes a sudden rush of feeling from the atomic levels of the emotional plane to  the intuitional plane, via the atomic channel that exists between the two. It sweeps  upward and clarifies the channel. 
On the Physical Planes: 
a—Here the effect is very similar, but the primary effect is on the etheric body; it  stimulates the divine flow. 
b—It passes beyond the periphery of the body and creates a shell that serves as a  protection. It drives away discordant factors in the near environment. 
June 22, 1920 
The Logoic Chord and Analogy. 
Now, let us proceed with the study of the use of the Sacred Word in its group  application and in its employment for certain specific ends. We have very briefly  studied the Word as used by the individual who begins to [Page 64] meditate,—the  effect of its use being very largely one of purification, stabilisation and centralisation.  This is all that is possible until the student has reached a point where he may be  allowed to sound the note in one of the subtones egoic. You will have in the egoic  note just the same sequence as in the note Logoic. What had you there? You had a  sevenfold chord of which the important points at our stage of development are: 
1—The basic note. 
2—The major third. 
3—The dominant or fifth. 
4—The ultimate seventh. 
A hint may here be given along the line of analogy. There is a close connection  between the fifth or dominant and the fifth principle, Manas or Mind, and, for this  solar system (though not for the first or third), there is an interesting response between  the fifth plane of mind and the dominant, and between the sixth plane of the emotions  and the major third. From some angles in this connection the emotional vehicle forms  a third vehicle for consciousness—counting the dense physical and the vehicle for 
prana or electrical vitality as two units. More I cannot say for the whole shifts and  interpenetrates, but I have indicated food for thought. 
In the egoic note,—as before said—you have a similar sequence, for it is the  reflection on its own plane of the Logoic. You will therefore have the basic note of  the physical, the third of the emotional, and the fifth of the causal levels. When a man  has mastered the key, and has found his own subtone then he will sound the sacred  Word with exactitude and thus reach the desired end; his alignment will be perfect,  the bodies will be pure, the channel [Page 65] free from obstruction, and the higher  inspiration will be possible. This is the aim of all true meditation and can be reached  by the right use of the Word. In the meantime, owing to the absence of a teacher and  the defects of the pupil, all that is now possible is to sound the Word as well as may  be, knowing that danger does not lurk where there is sincerity of purpose, and that  certain results, such as protection, quieting and correction may be achieved. 
Group Use of the Word. 
In group formation the effect of the Word is intensified, provided the groups are  correctly constituted, or rendered null and void and neutralised should the groups  contain undesirable elements. Certain things, therefore, have to be ascertained before  the Word may be used with adequacy by a group:— 
a—It is desirable that people on the same ray or on a complementary ray form a  group. 
b—It is desirable that the Word be intoned on the same key, or in part harmonic.  When this is done, the vibratory effect is far reaching and certain reactions will occur. 
What results, therefore, when the Word is correctly sounded by a group of people  rightly intermingled? 
a—A strong current is set up that reaches the disciple or the Master responsible for  the group and which enables him to put the group en rapport with the Brotherhood,  permitting the channel to be cleared for the transmission of teaching. 
b—A vacuum is created that corresponds somewhat to the vacuum that should exist  between the Ego and the Personality, but this time between a group and Those on the  inner side. 
[Page 66]  
c—If all conditions are right, it likewise results in a linking with the egoic groups of  the involved personalities, a stimulation of the causal bodies involved, and a linking  of all three groups—the lower, the higher and the Brotherhood—in a triangle for the  transmission of force. 
d—It has a definite effect on the physical vehicles of the lower group; it intensifies  the vibration of the emotional bodies, driving out countervibration and swinging all  into line with the higher rhythm. This results in equilibrium; it stimulates the lower  
mind, yet at the same time opens the connection with the higher, which higher,  entering in, stabilises the lower concrete mind.
e—It attracts the attention of certain of the devas or angels whose work lies with the  bodies of men, and enables them to do that work with greater exactitude and make  contacts that later will be of use. 
f—It creates a protective shell around the group, which (though only temporary) leads  to freedom from disturbance, enables the units of the group to work with greater ease  and according to the law, and helps the inner Teachers to find the line of least  resistance betwixt Themselves and those who seek Their instruction. 
g—It aids in the work of evolution. Infinitesimal that aid may be, yet every effort that  leads to the free play of the law, that acts in any way on matter for its greater refining,  that stimulates vibration and facilitates the contact between the higher and the lower is  an instrument in the hand of the Logos for the hastening of His plan. 
[Page 67]  
I have touched here upon certain effects incident upon the chanting of the Word in  unison. Later, as the rules of occult meditation are understood and experimentally  applied, these effects will be studied. As the race becomes more clairvoyant, they  will also be tabulated and checked. The geometrical forms created by the individual,  
and by the group, in sounding forth the Word will be recorded and noted. The  elimination of individuals from different groups and their assignment to other groups  more suitable will be effected by judicious consideration of the work done by them.  Later, as individuals develop the higher consciousness, wardens of groups must be  chosen—not only for their spiritual attainments and their intellectual capacity, but for  their ability to see with the inner vision, and hence assist their members and group to  rightful plans and to correct development. 
Groups for Specific Purposes. 
Groups will later be formed for specific purposes, which brings me to my third point,  the use of the Word for certain calculated ends. 
Let me enumerate for you some of the aims groups will have in view when they form  themselves, and by the use of the sacred Word, coupled to the true occult meditation,  achieve certain results. The time for this is not yet, and need arises not for detailed  description, yet if things progress as desired, even you may see it somewhat worked  out in your lifetime. 
l—Groups for the purpose of working on the emotional body with the object of  development, of subjugation, and clarification. 
2—Groups for the purpose of mental development, of strengthening equilibrium, and  the contacting of the higher mind. 
[Page 68]  
3—Groups for the healing of the physical body. 
4—Groups whose purpose is to effect alignment, and to clear the channel betwixt the  higher and the lower.
5—Groups for the treatment of obsessions and mental diseases. 
6—Groups whose work it will be to study reaction to the sounding of the Word, to  record and tabulate the consequent geometrical forms, to note its effect on individuals  in the groups, and to note the extraneous entities it draws by its attractive force.  These must be rather advanced groups, capable of clairvoyant investigation. 
7—Groups that definitely work at making contact with the devas, and collaborating  with them under the law. During the seventh ray activity, this will be much  facilitated. 
8—Groups that are definitely and scientifically working on the laws of the rays, and  studying colour and sound, their individual and group effects, and their interrelation.  This is necessarily a select group and only those of high spiritual attainment and those  nearing Initiation will be permitted to take part. Forget not that these groups on the  physical plane are but the inevitable working out into manifestation of the inner  groups of aspirants, pupils, disciples and initiates. 
9—Groups that are definitely working under some one Master, and conforming to  certain procedure laid down by Him. The members of these groups will therefore be  chosen by the Master. 
10—Groups working specifically under one of the three great departments and  seeking—under expert guidance—to influence politically and religiously [Page 69]  the world of men, and to speed the processes of evolution as directed from the  department of the Lord of Civilisation. Some of these groups will work under the  Church, others under Masonry, and others will work in connection with the Initiate  heads of the great organizations. In considering this you need to remember that the  whole world becomes ever more mental as time proceeds,—hence the ever-increased  scope of this type of work. 
ll—Other groups will work entirely in what might be termed preparatory work for the  future colony. 
12—Problem groups, as they might be called, will be formed to deal with social,  economic, political and religious problems as they arise, studying the effects of  meditation, colour and sound. 
13—Still other groups will deal with child culture, with the individual training of  people, with the guidance of persons on the probationary path, and with the  development of the higher faculties. 
12—Later, when the great Lord, the Christ, comes with His Masters, there will be a  few very esoteric groups, gathered out of all the others, where the members (through  graduation and karmic right) will be trained for discipleship and for the first Initiation.  There will be seven such groups or centres formed for definite occult training...Only  those whose vibratory capacity is adequate will find their way there.
I have given you enough to consider for today, and we will leave the consideration of  point the fourth till tomorrow. 
[Page 70]  
June 23, 1920 
You are right in thinking that conditions today are not desirable. The whole world  speeds towards a crisis—a crisis reconstructive, even though it seems to the onlooker  to be destructive. On all sides, the tearing down of the old forms is progressing, nor is  the work as yet fully accomplished. Enough has, nevertheless, been done to permit of  the erection of the scaffolding for the new building. In serenity and steady adherence  to the next duty will come the simplification of that which must he done. 
Today we deal with the effect of the Word on the various centres, on each body, and  its utility in aligning the bodies with the causal vehicle. This was our fourth point.  The first two are closely allied, for the sacred Word (when properly enunciated) acts  on the various bodies through the medium of the centres, and their astral and mental  counterparts. Some of the effects, such as the elimination of undesirable matter, and  the building in of new, the protective effect of the Word and its work of stabilisation  and purification, we have somewhat touched upon. We will now focus our attention  largely upon the centres and the result upon them of the sounding of the Word. 
The Seven Centres and the Sacred Word. 
As is our custom, let us divide our thoughts under the following heads. Tabulation  has its value; it systematises knowledge, thus tending to the orderly arrangement of  the mental body; it facilitates recollection through the assistance of the eye. 
l—Enumeration and discussion of the centres. 
2—Growth and development of the centres. 
3—The effect of meditation on the centres. 
4—Their interrelation in the work of alignment. 
[Page 71]  
First let me say that certain information that may seem to be the natural sequence and  corollary of that which I have to impart will have to be withheld. The dangers  involved through the injudicious development of the centres are too great for us to  venture yet to give full and detailed instructions. We seek to develop Masters of  Compassion, dispensers of the love of the universe. We seek not to develop Masters  of Black Arts and specialists in ruthless self-expression at the expense of the  uninitiated. Certain facts have been, and can be, imparted. They will lead to the  development of the intuition, and inspire the seeker after light to more earnest  endeavour. Others must be withheld for they would be weapons of great danger in the  hands of the unscrupulous. If then it seems to you that I have but imparted only  sufficient to arouse interest, know then that that is my aim. When your interest and  the interest of all aspirants is sufficiently aroused naught can then be withheld from  you. 
l—Enumeration of the centres.
The physical centres are, as you know:— 
l—The base of the spine. 
2—The solar plexus. 
3—The spleen. 
4—The heart. 
5—The throat. 
6—The pineal gland. 
7—The pituitary body. 
This enumeration is correct, but I seek to give you another division, based on earlier  imparted facts, those anent the solar system. These seven centres may be enumerated  as five if we eliminate the spleen and count the two head centres as one. The five  centres thus specified [Page 72] are applicable to our fivefold evolution in this the  second solar system. 
In the first solar system the three lower centres were developed and with them the  occultist has naught to do. They form the basis of the development of the lower  quaternary before individualisation, but are now transcended and the divine fire must  be focalised in other and higher centres. 
The Spleen. 
The spleen, the third centre, has a specific purpose. It has its correspondence in the  third or activity aspect, and in the third or Activity (Adaptability) Ray, and is the basis  of all the fundamental activities of the microcosm, and of the recurring adaptations of  the microcosm to its environment, to its need and to the macrocosm. It controls the  selective processes of the microcosm; it takes the vibratory force and energy of the  macrocosm and transmutes it for the use of the microcosm. We might call it the  organ of transmutation, and—as its functions are more completely understood—it will  be found that it provides a magnetic link between the conscious, thinking, three-fold  man and his lower vehicles, regarding those lower vehicles as the Not-Self, and as  themselves animated by informing entities. It is the life force contacting those entities  that is the issue and aim. 
In its emotional counterpart, it is the organ of emotional vitality, again in the same  sense as providing a link; on the mental plane it serves somewhat the same purpose,  only this time through this centre are the thoughtforms vitalised by means of the  energising will. I will not, therefore, deal more fully with this centre beyond these  general indications. Few people have the faculty of stimulating [Page 73] it through the use of the Word, nor is it desirable that they should. It develops normally if the  aspirant himself—as a totality—progresses as desired:—if his physical body receives  adequate application of the life forces of the sun, if his emotional body is moved by  high desire, and open to the downflow of force from the causal and intuitional levels,  and if his mental life is intense, vibrant, and animated by a powerful will. Then the  spleen, with its inner counterparts, will progress and be in a healthy condition. 
We will therefore thus dispose of it and give no further space to it in these letters. The fundamental centres.
The three fundamental centres of vital importance from the standpoint of the average  man, polarised in his emotional body and living the normal life of the man of the  world, are: 
l—The base of the spine. 
2—The solar plexus. 
3—The heart centre. 
The three major centres for the man nearing the Probationary Path and for the man  who is aiming at a life of altruism, having examined the attractions of the three  worlds, are: 
l—The base of the spine. 
2—The heart. 
3—The throat. 
His solar plexus is left then to normal functioning, having served its purpose as a  centre for the emotional focussing. The activity of the fire becomes more centered in  the throat. 
[Page 74]  
The three major centres for the man on the Path itself in its twofold divisions are:— 
l—The heart. 
2—The throat. 
3—The head. 
The divine activity has developed the solar plexus centre, is controlling all the centres  below the solar plexus, and is passing upward in ordered progression until it is  focussed and vivifying the head centres. 
Earlier we divided the life of the man into five main periods, tracing his development  in each. We might (if we are careful to generalise widely) apply the same to the five  centres. 
Period I—wherein the base of the spine is the most active in the purely rotary sense  and not in a fourth-dimensional. The inner fire is focussed on the vivification of the  organs of generation and on the functional physical life of the personality. 
Period II—wherein the solar plexus is the goal of the attention of the fire and when  the emotional counterpart vibrates synchronously. Two centres are thus vibrating,  even though the measure be slow; the others are alive; pulsation can be seen, but there  is no circular movement. 
Period III—The divine fire now mounts to the heart centre and the three rotate in  ordered measured unison. I would point out that the vivification of any one centre.  causes an accession of force in all, and I would further point out that in the head are  seven centres (three major and four minor) and that these centres directly correspond  to one or other centre in the body. They are the synthesis, and, on the stimulation of 
their corresponding centre, receive themselves a corresponding acquisition of rotary  power. 
[Page 75]  
Period IV—marks the definite stimulation of the throat centre. All the creative  activity of the three-fold man—physical, emotional and mental—is turned upward in  service, and his life begins occultly to sound. He is occultly productive. He manifests  forth and his sound goes out before him. This is an occult statement of fact definitely  apparent to those who have the inner vision. Coordination between the centres  becomes apparent; rotation is intensified, and the centres themselves change in  appearance, becoming unfolded, and the rotary movement becomes fourth dimensional, turning inward upon itself. The centres are then radiating nuclei of light,  and the corresponding four lower head centres are equally alive. 
Period V—marks the application of the fire to the head centres and their complete  awakening. 
Before initiation, all the centres will be rotating in fourth dimensional order, but after  initiation they become flaming wheels, and—seen clairvoyantly—are of rare beauty,  The fire of Kundalini is then awakened and is progressing in the necessary spirals. At  the second initiation the emotional centres are similarly awakened, and at the third  initiation those on the mental plane are touched. The initiate can then stand in the  Presence of the Great King, the One Initiator. 
I seek to point out that the student must ever remember that here generalisations only  are given. The complexity in the development of the microcosm is as great as in the  macrocosm. The awakening of the centres and their particular order is dependent on  several factors, such as: 
a—The Ray of the Spirit or Monad. 
b—The Ray of the Ego, Higher Self, or Son, or the sub-ray. 
[Page 76]  
c—Race and nationality. 
d—The special type of work to be done. 
e—The application of the student. 
Fundamental centres of average man. 
Fundamental centres of developed man. 
Fundamental centres of man on Path. 
Hence you can see for yourself that it is useless to lay down rules for the development  of the centres and to formulate methods whereby the fire can be circulated until such  time as trained teachers with expert knowledge and clairvoyant faculty are in charge  of the work on the physical plane. It is not desirable for aspirants to focus their  thought on any one centre. They run the risk of overstimulation, [Page 77] or of 
attrition. It is not wished that effort be made to turn the fire towards any particular  point; in ignorant manipulation lies insanity and fell disease. If the aspirant but seeks  spiritual development, if he but aims at sincerity of purpose and at compassionate  altruism, if he, with serene application, concentrates on the subjugation of the  emotional body and the enlargement of the mental, and cultivates the habit of abstract  thinking, the desired results upon the centres will be produced from necessity and  danger will be eliminated. 
When these triangles are paths of threefold fire, emanating from the base of the spine,  when the interlacing is complete and the fire progresses along the path from centre to  centre in the correct manner, and when this is accomplished in the order required by  the man's primary ray, then the work is completed. The fivefold man has attained  perfection for this present greater cycle and the goal is reached. 
(Note that this order has to be attained in the head centres likewise.) 
Tomorrow we will continue the study of the centres more specifically and somewhat  describe them, pointing to the effect upon the life through the awakening of these  wheels. 
June 25, 1920. 
2—The growth and development of the centres. 
We will now enumerate the centres again, this time considering their psychic  correspondences and will note the colours and the number of the petals. 
1—The base of the spine. Four petals. These petals are in the shape of a cross, and  radiate with orange fire. 
[Page 78]  
2—The solar plexus. Ten petals. The colour rosy, with an admixture of green. 3— The heart centre. Twelve petals. Colour glowing golden. 
4—The throat centre. Sixteen petals. Colour silvery blue, the blue predominating. 5—The head centres. These are in a twofold division;— 
a—Between the eyebrows. Ninety-six petals. Colour, one-half of the lotus is rose  and yellow, and the other half is blue and purple. 
b—The top of the head. There are twelve major petals of white and gold, and 960  secondary petals are arranged around the central twelve. This makes a total of 1068  petals in the two head centres, or 356 triplicities. All these figures have an occult  significance. 
This description is taken from "The Inner Life." This description applies to the  etheric centres, which are themselves the working out into physical plane  manifestation of corresponding vortices on the emotional plane, with emotional 
vitality playing through. They have their mental counterparts, and in their awakening  as aforesaid, and in their growth and development, comes the final vivification, and  the resultant liberation. 
The connection between the centres, the causal body and meditation lies hid in the  following hint: it is through the rapid whirling and interaction of these centres and  their increased force through meditation (the ordered occult meditation) that the  shattering of the causal body is effected. When the inner fire is circulating through  each centre and when kundalini is spiralling [Page 79] accurately and geometrically  from vortex to vortex, the intensification interacts in three directions. 
a—It focuses the light or the consciousness of the Higher Self into the three lower  vehicles, drawing it downward into fuller expression and widening its contact on all  the three planes in the three worlds. 
b—It draws down from the threefold Spirit more and more of the fire of the Spirit,  doing for the causal body what the Ego is doing for the three lower vehicles. 
c—It forces the unification of the higher and lower, and it attracts the spiritual life  itself. When this is done, when each successive life sees an increase of vitality in the  centres, and when kundalini in its seven-fold capacity touches each centre, then even  the causal body proves inadequate for the influx of life from above. If I might so  express it, the two fires meet, and eventually the egoic body disappears; the fire burns  up entirely the Temple of Solomon; the permanent atoms are destroyed, and all is  reabsorbed into the Triad. The essence of the Personality, the faculties developed, the  knowledge gained, and the remembrance of all that has transpired becomes part of the  equipment of the Spirit and eventually finds its way to the Spirit or Monad on its own  plane. 
Now let me enumerate for you the things as to which it will not be possible as yet to  furnish more information; the risks involved would be too great. 
l—The method of arousing the Sacred Fire. 
2—The order of its progression. 
3—The geometrical forms it makes as it mounts. 
4—The order of the development of the centres. according to the ray of the Spirit.  The complexity is too great. 
[Page 80]  
You will therefore observe that the subject really becomes more abstruse, the longer it  is studied. It is complicated by ray development, by the man's own place upon the  ladder of evolution, by the uneven awakening of the different centres due to the type  of a man's lives; it is rendered more complex by the threefold nature of the centres  themselves,—etheric, emotional and mental—by the fact, that some people have one  or other emotional centre completely awakened and demonstrating etherically whilst  the mental counterparts may be quiescent; others may have the mental centres awake  and the emotional not so vivified and be etherically quiet. Therefore, it will be  obvious how great is the need for conscious clairvoyant teachers, who can judiciously  work with the pupils, stimulating through scientific knowledge and methods the  dormant or sluggish centres, and aligning them so that the current can freely flow 
back and forth between the external vortices and the inner centre. Later the teacher  can train the pupil in the safe awakening of the inner fire, in its scientific culture and  transmission, and instruct him in the order required for its convolutions along the path  of the triangles until it reaches the head centres. When kundalini has traversed these  geometrical lines the man is perfected, the personality has served its purpose, and the  goal is reached. Hence the fact that all the centres have petals whose numbers are  multiples of four, for four is the number of the lower self, of the quaternary. The total  number of petals in the centres, if we eliminate the spleen which has a purpose all its  own, and the three lower organs of creation, is one thousand, one hundred and ten, the  total number signifying the perfection of the microcosm,—ten the number of  perfected personality, one hundred the number of causal perfection, and one thousand  the number of spiritual [Page 81] achievement. When every petal vibrates in all the  dimensions, then the goal for this manvantara is reached. The lower lotus is full  blown, and reflects the greater with precision. 
June 26, 1920. 
The effect of occult meditation on the centres. 
We shall study today the effect of occult meditation upon the centres and their  consequent vivification, positing a meditation prefaced always by the use of the  Sacred Word, uttered according to rule. 
We speak also of a meditation followed under the guidance of a teacher. The man  therefore will meditate correctly or approximately so; thus what we are to consider  today is the factor of time, in its relationship to the centres, for the work is slow and  necessarily gradual. Here I would pause to emphasize to you the need of ever  remembering that in all work that is truly occult expected effects are very slowly  achieved. Should a man seem in any one incarnation to make spectacular progress it  is due to the fact that he is but demonstrating what has already been earlier acquired  (the manifesting forth of innate faculty, acquired in previous incarnations) and is  preparing for a fresh period of slow, careful and painstaking endeavor. He  recapitulates in the present life the processes surmounted in the past, and thus lays the  foundation for renewed effort. This slow and laborious effort, which is the consistent  method of all that evolves, is after all but an illusion of time and is due to the fact that  consciousness is at present for the majority polarised in the lower vehicles and not in  the causal. The states of consciousness succeed each other apparently slowly, and in  their slow progression lies the chance for the Ego to assimilate the fruit of these  stages. [Page 82] It takes a long time to establish a stable vibration, and it takes as  long to shatter it, and to impose another and still higher rhythm. Growth is one long  period of building in order to destroy, of constructing in order to disorganise later, of  developing certain rhythmic processes in order to later disrupt them, and to force the  old rhythm to give place to the new. What the Personality spends many thousands of  lives in establishing is not going to be lightly altered when the Ego—working in the  lower consciousness—seeks to effect a change. The shifting of polarisation from  emotional to mental, and thence to the causal and later to the three-fold Spirit  inevitably entails a period of great difficulty, of violent conflict both internally and  with the environment, intense suffering and apparent darkness and disruption—all  these things characterise the life of the aspirant or the disciple. What causes this and  why is this so? The following reasons may make it apparent why the path is so hard 
to tread and the process of mounting the ladder (as one nears the higher rungs)  becomes ever more complicated and difficult. 
1—Each body has to be dealt with and disciplined separately and thus purified. 2—Each body has to be readjusted and aligned. 
3—Each body has to be subjected to repolarisation. 
4—Each body is practically reconstructed. 
5—Each subplane above the fourth (for on the fourth the life of the aspirant starts) has  to be dominated. 
6—Each centre has to be gradually, carefully and scientifically awakened, its  revolutions have to be intensified, its radiations electrified (if I may borrow that term  and apply it to the centres) and its force must demonstrate through the higher  dimension. 
[Page 83]  
7—Each etheric centre has to be magnetically linked, in full alignment, with the  corresponding centres in the emotional and mental bodies, so that the flow of force is  unimpeded. 
8—Each centre has then to be awakened afresh by the Sacred Fire till the radiations,  the velocity and the colours are keyed to the egoic note. This is part of the work of  Initiation. 
As each change is gradually made, it responds to the same law that governs all cyclic  growth in the macrocosm: 
l—First comes the clashing of the old with the new rhythm. 
2—This is followed by a period of gradual dominance of the new, elimination of the  old, and the stabilisation of the new vibration. 
3—Then finally comes the passing on and out, and again a repetition of the process. 
It is this work that is done on the bodies and on the centres by the work of meditation  and the use of the Sacred Word. This Word aids in the adjustment of the matter, its  vitalisation by fire, and enables the aspirant to work in line with the law. This  unfoldment of the centres is a gradual process, paralleling the work done on the  bodies, the refining of the vehicles and the slow development of causal consciousness. 
Concluding remarks. 
In concluding this division upon the use of the Sacred Word in meditation, I would  like to indicate certain things, though more than a hint is not possible. This matter has  been difficult for you to comprehend, and I fully realise it. The difficulty lies in the  fact that so little [Page 84] can be safely said, that the real use of the Word is one of  the secrets of initiation and may not therefore be divulged, and that what little can be  indicated is of small value to the student apart from the wise attempt to experiment,  which experiment must be carried on under the guidance of one who knows. Still, I  will indicate certain things which, wisely pondered upon, may lead to illumination. 
When meditating in the heart centre, picture it as a golden lotus closed. When the  Sacred Word is enunciated, picture it as a lotus slowly expanding until the inner  centre or vortex is seen as a radiating whirlpool of electric light, more blue than 
golden. Build there the picture of the Master, in etheric, emotional and mental matter.  This entails the withdrawing of the consciousness ever more and more inwards.  When the picture is fully built then gently sound the Word again, and with an effort of  the will withdraw still further inwards and link up with the twelve petalled head  centre, the centre of causal consciousness. Do all this very slowly and gradually,  maintaining an attitude of perfect peace and calm. There is a direct relationship  between the two twelve petalled centres and occult meditation, and the action of the  kundalini fire will later reveal its significance. This visualization leads to synthesis,  to causal development and expansion, and eventually conducts a man into the  presence of the Master. 
The solar plexus is the seat of the emotions and should not be centred upon in  meditation. It is a basis for physical healing and will later be more completely  understood. It is the centre of activity—an activity which must later be intuitional.  The throat centre works radiantly when the polarisation is shifting from the physical  atom to the mental permanent atom as dealt with earlier. [Page 85] The mental  permanent atom becomes the centre of pure reason or of abstract thought. Then  comes a time in the development of consciousness when the emotional force which  governs so many is transcended and superseded by the force of the higher intellect. It  often marks a period when a man is swayed purely by reason and his emotions do not  control him. This may demonstrate in the personal life on the physical plane as  intellectual hardness. Later, the emotional permanent atom gives place to the  intuitional, and pure intuition and perfect comprehension through love is the motive  power, with the faculty of reason added. Then the solar plexus is distinguished by the  preponderance of the green of activity, for the emotional body is actively the agent of  the higher, and engenders but little of the rose of human desire. 
In the whirling of the force through the vortex (which whirling forms the petals of the  lotus) it will be observed that certain petals predominantly stand out, and each centre  demonstrates one particular type of cross, with the exception of the two head centres  which are the synthesis of the lower crosses. The four-armed cross of the third Logos  is found at the base of the spine and the cross of the fourth human Hierarchy in the  heart. 
When the Sacred Word is intoned by the average aspirant, it carries force through all  the inner centres to the etheric, and causes a definite stimulation of the petals in each  centre. If the lotus is only partially unfolded, then only some of the petals receive the  
stimulation. This stimulation creates a vibration (especially in the centre in which a  man meditates—the head or the heart) which causes reflex action in the spine and  down to the base. This is not in itself sufficient to arouse the fire; that can only be  done in due form, in the right key and subject to certain rules. 
[Page 86]  
When meditation is done in the heart and under occult laws, with the correct intoning  of the Word, the force comes through the emotional centres from the intuitional  levels. When it is done in the head, the force comes through the mental centres from  the abstract manasic levels, and later from the atmic. The one gives spiritual intuition,  and the other causal consciousness.
The advanced man is the man who is linking up the two major centres,—the head and  the heart,—into one, synthetic instrument, and whose throat centre vibrates to the  same measure. Then you have will and love blended in harmonious service, and the  lower physical activity is transmuted into idealism and altruism. When this stage is  reached, the man is ready for the awakening of the inner fire. His bodies are refined  enough to withstand the pressure and the onrush; they contain nothing dangerous to  its progress; the centres are keyed high enough to receive the acquisition of fresh  stimulation. When this has been done, the hour of initiation comes when the would be server of humanity will stand before his Lord, with purified desire, consecrated  intellect, and a physical body that is his servant and not his master. 
Today we will bring this letter to a close. Tomorrow, we will take up the dangers that  confront the man who meditates. I shall seek to point out what he must guard against  and wherein he must move with caution. 
[Page 87]  
LETTER V - DANGERS TO BE AVOIDED IN MEDITATION LETTER V 
DANGERS TO BE AVOIDED IN MEDITATION. 
l—Dangers inherent in the Personality. 
2—Dangers arising from Karma. 
3—Dangers arising from subtle forces. 
[Page 88]  
LETTER V 
July 22, 1920. 
DANGERS TO BE AVOIDED IN MEDITATION. 
The Withholding of Information. 
We have reached a point now where the foundations of knowledge have been laid,— that knowledge which instills into the wise student the desire to submit to the  necessary rules, to conform to the prescribed requirements, and to make the  comprehended mental concepts practical experiences in daily life. This desire is wise  and right, and the object of all that has been imparted, but at this juncture it may be  wise to sound a warning note, to point out certain dangerous possibilities, and to put  the student on his guard against an enthusiasm that may lead him along paths that will  hinder development, and that may build up vibrations that will ultimately have to be  offset. This entails delay and a recapitulation in work that (if realised in time) might  be obviated.
Certain statements and instructions cannot be made or given in writing to students for  three reasons:— 
l—Some instructions are always given orally, as they appeal to the intuition and are  not for the pondering and logical reasoning of lower mind; they also contain elements  of danger if submitted to the unready. 
2—Some instructions pertain to the secrets of the Path, and are mainly applicable to  the groups to which the student is attached; they can only be given in joint instruction  when out of the physical body. They pertain to the group causal body, to certain ray  secrets, and to the invoking of the assistance of the higher devas to bring [Page 89]  about desired results. The dangers attached thereto are too great to permit of their  being communicated in an exoteric publication. The occult effects of the spoken  word and of the written word are diverse and interesting. Until such time as you have  among you a wise Teacher in physical person, and until it is possible for Him to  gather around Him His students, thus affording them the protection of His aura and its  stimulating vibration, and until such time as world conditions permit of a certain  period of relaxation from the present strain and suspense, it will not be possible to  impart forms, invocations and mantrams of a specific character; it will not be possible  to arouse the centres ahead of the necessary evolutionary rate, except in a few  individual cases where certain pupils (perhaps unconsciously to themselves) are being  subjected to definite processes, which result in a greatly increased rate of vibration.  This is only being done to a few in each country, and is directly under the eye of a  Master, focusing through H.P.B. 
3—Information as to the invoking of devas in meditation cannot yet be safely given to  individuals, though a beginning is being made with groups such as in the rituals of the  Masons and of the Church. Formulas that put the lesser devas under the control of  man will not yet he imparted. Human beings are not yet to be trusted with that power, for the majority are but animated by selfish desire and would misuse it for their own  ends. It is deemed by the wise Teachers of the race,—as I think I have before said— that the dangers of too little knowledge are much less than the dangers of too much,  and that the race can be more seriously hindered by the misapplication of powers  gained by incipient occultists than it can by a lack of knowledge that engenders not  karmic results. The powers gained in meditation, the [Page 90] capacities achieved  by the adjustment of the bodies through meditation, the faculties developed in each  vehicle by definite formulas in meditation, the manipulation of matter that is one of  the functions of the occultist (the result of well-adjusted vehicles that respond  perfectly to plane conditions) and the attainment of causal consciousness—a  consciousness that carries with it the ability to include within itself all the lesser—are  of too serious a character to be lightly disposed of, and in the training of man along  these lines only those are encouraged by the teacher who can be trusted. Trusted in  what sense? Trusted to think in group terms and not in terms of self, trusted to use the  knowledge gained anent the bodies and the karma of environing associates solely for  their wise assistance and not for selfish purposes, and trusted to use occult powers for  the furtherance of evolution and for the development on all planes of the schemes of  evolution as planned by the three Great Lords. 
Let me illustrate:—
One of the things accomplished in meditation when pursued with regularity and under  correct instruction is the transference of the consciousness of the lower self into the  higher. This carries with it the capacity to see on causal levels, intuitively to  recognize facts in the lives of others, to foresee events and occurrences and to know  the relative value of a personality. This can only be permitted when the student can  be silent, selfless and stable. Who as yet answers to all these requirements? 
I am endeavoring to give you a general idea of the dangers incident to the too early  development of the powers achieved in meditation. I seek to sound a note—not of  discouragement—but of insistence upon physical purity, on emotional stability and on  mental equilibrium before the student passes on to greater knowledge. Only [Page  91] as the channel opens to the intuition and closes to the animal nature can a man  wisely proceed with his work. Only as the heart enlarges its capacity to suffer with all  that breathes, to love all that is contacted, and to understand and sympathise with the  least desirable of God's creatures, can the work go forward as desired. Only when the  development is equable, only when the intellect runs not too far ahead of the heart,  and the mental vibration shuts not out the higher one of the Spirit can the student be  trusted to acquire powers that, wrongly used, may result in disaster to his environment  as well as to himself. Only as he formulates no thoughts save such as he purposes to  make for the helping of the world can he be trusted wisely to manipulate thought  matter. Only as he has no desire save to find out the plans of the Master, and then to  assist definitely in making those plans facts in manifestation, can he be trusted with  the formulas that will bring the devas of lesser degree under his control. The dangers  are so great and the perils that beset the unwary student so many that before I proceed  further I have sought to urge caution. 
Let us now specify and enumerate certain dangers that must be guarded against by the  man who progresses in meditation. Some of them are due to one cause and some to  another, and we shall have to specify with accuracy. 
l—Dangers inherent in the Personality of the pupil. They can, as you foresee, be  grouped under the three heads:—physical dangers, emotional dangers, and mental  dangers. 
2—Dangers arising from the karma of the pupil, and from his environment. These  also may be enumerated under three divisions: 
[Page 92]  
a—The karma of his present life, his own individual "ring-pass-not," as represented  by his present life. 
b—His national heredity and instincts as, for instance, whether he possesses an  occidental or an oriental type of body. 
c—His group affiliations, whether exoteric or esoteric. 
3—Dangers arising from the subtle forces that you ignorantly call evil; such dangers  consist in attack on the pupil by extraneous entities on some one plane. These entities  may simply be discarnate human beings; they may be the denizens of the other planes  who are nonhuman; later on, when the student is of sufficient importance to attract  notice, the attack may come from those who deal purely with matter to the hindrance 
of spiritual growth,—the black magicians, the dark brothers, and other forces that  appear destructive. This appearance is only such when viewed from the angle of time  and in our three worlds, and is but incidental to the fact that our Logos Himself is also  evolving, and (from the standpoint of the infinitely greater Ones Who assist Him in  His development) it is dependent upon His transitory imperfections. The  imperfections of nature—as we term them—are the imperfections of the Logos, and  will eventually be transcended. 
I have therefore outlined for you this morning the material I shall seek to impart  during the coming days. 
July 24, 1920. 
The dangers that beset the student of meditation are dependent upon many factors,  and it will not be possible to do more than briefly indicate certain menacing  conditions, to warn against certain disastrous possibilities, and to caution the pupil  against results that are to be [Page 93] reached by undue strain, by over-excess of  zeal, and by a one-pointedness that may lead to an unbalanced development. One pointedness is a virtue, but it should be the one-pointedness of purpose and of aim,  and not that which develops one sole line of method to the exclusion of all others. 
The dangers of meditation are largely the dangers of our virtues, and therein lies much  of the difficulty. They are largely the dangers of a fine mental concept that runs  ahead of the capacity of the lower vehicles, especially of the dense physical.  Aspiration, concentration and determination are necessary virtues, but if used without  discrimination and without a sense of time in evolution they may lead to a shattering  of the physical vehicle that will delay all progress for some one particular life. Have I  made my point clear? I seek but to bring out the absolute necessity for the occult  student to have a virile common sense for one of his basic qualities, coupled with a  happy sense of proportion that leads to due caution and an approximation of the  necessary method to the immediate need. To the man therefore who undertakes  wholeheartedly the process of occult meditation I would say with all conciseness:— 
a—Know thyself. 
b—Proceed slowly and with caution. 
c—Study effects. 
d—Cultivate the realisation that eternity is long and that that which is slowly built up  endures forever. 
e—Aim at regularity. 
f—Realise always that the true spiritual effects are to be seen in the exoteric life of  service. 
g—Remember likewise that psychic phenomena are no indication of a successful  following of meditation. The world will see the effects and be a better [Page 94]  judge than the student himself. Above all, the Master will know, for the results on  causal levels will be apparent to Him long before the man himself is conscious of any  progress. 
Let us now take up these points in detail. 
Dangers inherent in the Personality.
Let us, therefore, consider first those dangers most closely connected with the man's  own personal life, and which are dependent upon his three bodies, their separate  condition and their interrelation. This subject is so vast that it will not be possible to  do more than indicate certain results due to certain conditions; each man presents a  different problem, and each body causes a different reaction, and each totality in his  threefold nature is affected by its alignment or by its lack of alignment. Let us take  each body separately at first and then in their threefold totality. In this way some  specific facts may be imparted. 
I begin with the mental body as it is for the student of meditation the one that is the  centre of his effort and the one that controls the two lower bodies. The true student  seeks to draw his consciousness away from his physical body, and away from the  emotional body into the realms of thought, or into the lower mind body. Having  achieved that much, he seeks then to transcend that lower mind and to become  polarised in the causal body, using the antahkarana, as the channel of communication  between the higher and the lower, the physical brain being then but the quiescent  receiver of that which is transmitted from the Ego or Higher Self and later from the  threefold Spirit, the Triad. The work to be done necessitates a working from the  periphery inwards, and a consequent centralisation. Having achieved that [Page 95]  centralisation and focussed in that stable centre—with the solar plexus and the heart  quiet—a point within the head, one of the three major head centres, becomes the  centre of consciousness, the ray of a man's ego deciding which that centre will be.  This is the method of the majority. Then that point having been reached, a man will  follow the meditation of his ray as indicated to you in general terms earlier in these  letters. In each case, the mental body becomes the centre of consciousness and then  later—through practice—it becomes the point of departure for the transference of the  polarisation into a higher body, first the causal and later into the Triad. 
The dangers to the mental body are very real and must be guarded against. They are  paramountly two, and might be termed the dangers of inhibition and those due to the  atrophying of the body. 
a—Let us take first the dangers due to inhibition. Some people, by their sheer  strength of will, reach a point in meditation where they directly inhibit the processes  of the lower mind. If you picture the mental body as an ovoid, surrounding the  physical body and extending much beyond it, and if you realise that through that  ovoid are constantly circulating thoughtforms of various kinds (the content of the  man's mind and the thoughts of his environing associates) so that the mental egg is  coloured by predominant attractions and diversified by many geometrical forms, all in  a state of flux or circulation, you may get some idea of what I mean. When a man  proceeds to quiet that mental body by inhibiting or suppressing all movement, he will  arrest these thoughtforms within the mental ovoid, he will stop circulation and may  bring about results of a serious nature. This inhibition has a direct effect upon the  physical brain, and is the cause of much of the fatigue complained of after a period  [Page 96] of meditation. If persisted in, it may lead to disaster. All beginners do it  more or less, and until they learn to guard against it they will stultify their progress  and retard development. The results may indeed be more serious.
What are the right methods of thought elimination? How can placidity of mind be  achieved without the use of the will in inhibition? The following suggestions may be  found useful and helpful:— 
The student having withdrawn his consciousness on to the mental plane at some point  within the brain, let him sound forth the Sacred Word gently three times. Let him  picture the breath sent forth as a clarifying, expurgating force that in its progress  onward sweeps away the thoughtforms circulating within the mental ovoid. Let him  then at the close realise that the mental body is free and clear of thoughtforms. 
Let him then raise his vibration as high as may be, and aim next at lifting it clear of  the mental body into the causal, and so bring in the direct action of the Ego upon the  lower three vehicles. As long as he can keep his consciousness high and as long as he  holds a vibration that is that of the Ego on its own plane, the mental body will be held  in a state of equilibrium. It will hold no lower vibration analogous to the  thoughtforms circulating in its environment. The force of the Ego will circulate  throughout the mental ovoid, permitting no extraneous geometrical units to find  entrance, and the dangers of inhibition will be offset. Even more will be done,—the  mental matter will in process of time become so attuned to the higher vibration that in  due course that vibration will become stable and will automatically throw off all that  is lower and undesirable. 
b—What do I mean by the dangers of atrophy? [Page 97] Simply this: Some natures  become so polarised on the mental plane that they run the risk of breaking connection  with the two lower vehicles. These lower bodies exist for purposes of contact, for the  
apprehension of knowledge on the lower planes and for reasons of experience in order  that the content of the causal body may be increased. Therefore it will be apparent to  you that if the indwelling consciousness comes no lower than the mental plane and  neglects the body of emotions and the dense physical, two things will result. The  lower vehicles will be neglected and useless and fail in their purposes, atrophying and  dying from the point of view of the Ego, whilst the causal body itself will not be built  as desired and so time will be lost. The mental body will be rendered useless  likewise, and will become a thing of selfish content, of no use in the world and of  littler value. A dreamer whose dreams never materialise, a builder who stores up  material which he never employs, a visionary whose visions are of no use to gods or  men, is a clog upon the system universal. He is in great danger of atrophying. 
Meditation should have the effect of bringing all three bodies more completely under  the control of the Ego, and lead to a co-ordination and an alignment, to a rounding-out  and a symmetrical development that will make a man of real use to the Great Ones.  When a man realises that mayhap he is too much centralised on the mental plane he  should definitely aim at making all his mental experiences, aspirations and  endeavours matters of fact on the physical plane, bringing the two lower vehicles  under control of the mental and making them the instruments of his mental creations  and activities. 
I have here indicated two of the dangers most frequently met with, and I advise all  students of occultism [Page 98] to remember that all the three bodies are of equal  importance in carrying out the work to be done, both from the egoic standpoint and 
from the standpoint of service to the race. Let them aim at a wise co-ordination in  expression, that will enable the God within to manifest for the aiding of the world. 
July 25, 1920. 
The emotional body is at this time the most important body in the Personality for  several reasons. It is a complete unit, unlike the physical and mental bodies; it is the  centre of polarisation for the majority of the human family; it is the most difficult  body to control, and is practically the very last body to be completely subjugated.  The reason for this is that the vibration of desire has dominated, not only the human  kingdom but also the animal and vegetable kingdoms in a lesser sense, so that the  evolving inner man has to work against inclinations set up in these kingdoms. Before  the spirit can function through forms of the fifth or spiritual kingdom, this desire  vibration has to he eliminated, and selfish inclination transmuted into spiritual  aspiration. The emotional body forms practically a unit with the physical body, for  the average man functions almost entirely at the instigation of the emotional,—his  lowest vehicle automatically obeying the behests of a higher. It is also the body that  connects most directly, as has been oft-times said, with the intuitional levels, and one  path of attainment lies that way. In meditation the emotional body should be  controlled from the mental plane, and when the polarisation has been transferred into  the mental body through forms of meditation and intensity of purpose and of will,  then the emotional becomes quiescent and receptive. 
[Page 99]  
This negative attitude in itself, if carried too far, opens the door to serious dangers,  which I will later enlarge upon when we take up the subject of obsessions, divine  sometimes, but more oft the reverse. A negative condition is not desired in either of  the bodies, and it is just this very negativeness that beginners in meditation so oft  achieve, and so run into danger. The aim should be to make the emotional ovoid  positive to all that is lower and to its environment and only receptive to the Spirit via  the causal. This can only be brought about by the development of the faculty of  conscious control—that control which even in the moments of highest vibration and  contact is alert to watch and guard the lower vehicles. "Watch and pray," the Great  Lord said when last on earth, and He spoke in occult terms, that have not as yet  received due attention or interpretation. 
What must therefore be watched? 
l—The attitude of the emotional ovoid and its positive-negative control. 2—The stability of the emotional matter and its conscious receptivity. 
3—Its alignment with the mental and with the causal bodies. If this alignment is  imperfect (as it so frequently is) it causes inaccuracy in reception from the higher  planes, distortion of the truths sent down via the Ego, and a very dangerous  transference of force to undesirable centres. This lack of alignment is the cause of the  frequent straying from sexual purity of many apparently spiritually inclined persons.  They can touch the intuitional levels somewhat, the Ego can partially transmit power  from on high, but as the alignment is imperfect the force from those higher levels is  deflected, the wrong centres are over-stimulated, and disaster results.
4—Another danger to be guarded against is that of [Page 100] obsession, but in pure  thoughts, spiritual aims, and unselfish brotherly conduct, lie the fundamentals of  protection. If to these essentials is added common sense in meditation and a wise  application of occult rules, with due consideration of ray and karma, these dangers  will disappear. 
July 28, 1920. 
Some thoughts on FIRE. 
Just prior to beginning the consideration of the matter on hand, I would like to point  out to you a certain rather interesting fact. Most of the psychological phenomena of  the earth are—as you will realise, if you think clearly,—under the control of the Deva  Lord Agni, the great primary Lord of Fire, the Ruler of the mental plane. Cosmic fire  forms the background of our evolution; the fire of the mental plane, its inner control  and dominance and its purifying asset coupled to its refining effects, is the aim of the  evolution of our three-fold life. When the inner fire of the mental plane and the fire  latent in the lower vehicles merge with the sacred fire of the Triad the work is  completed, and the man stands adept. The at-one-ment has been made and the work  of aeons is completed. All this is brought about through the co-operation of the Lord  Agni, and the high devas of the mental plane working with the Ruler of that plane,  and with the Raja-Lord of the second plane. 
Macrocosmic evolution proceeds in like manner to the microcosmic. The internal  fires of the terrestrial globe, deep in the heart of our earth sphere, will merge with the  sacred fire of the sun at the end of the greater cycle, and the solar system will then  have reached its apotheosis. Little by little as the aeons slip away and the lesser  cycles run their course, fire will permeate the ethers and will be daily more  recognisable and controlled till eventually [Page 101] cosmic and terrestrial fire will  be at-one (the bodies of all material forms adapting themselves to the changing  conditions) and the correspondence will be demonstrated. When this is realised the  phenomena of the earth—such as, for instance, seismic disturbance—can be studied  with greater interest. Later, when more is comprehended, the effects of such  disturbances will be understood and likewise their reactions on the sons of men.  During the summer months—as that great cycle comes around in different quarters of  the earth—the fire devas, the fire elementals and those obscure entities the  "agnichaitans" of the internal furnaces, come into greater activity, relapsing as the sun  moves further away, into a less active condition. You have here a correspondence  between the fiery aspects of the earth economy in their relationship to the sun similar  to the watery aspects and their connection with the moon. I give you quite an occult  hint here. I would like also to give you here a very brief though occult fragment  that...may now he made public. If pondered on, it carries the student to a high plane  and stimulates vibration. 
"The secret of the Fire lies hid in the second letter of the sacred Word. The mystery  of life is concealed within the heart. When that lower point vibrates, when the Sacred  Triangle glows, when the point, the middle centre, and the apex likewise burn, then  the two triangles—the greater and the lesser—merge into one flame which burneth up  the whole."
It is our task now to deal briefly with the dangers that attend the practice of meditation  as they manifest in the physical body. These dangers—like so much else in the  Logoic scheme—assume a three-fold nature, attacking [Page 102] three departments  of the physical body. They show themselves: 
a—In the brain. 
b—In the nervous system. 
c—In the sex organs. 
It is needless to point out now the reason why I dealt first with the dangers of the  mental and emotional bodies. It was necessary so to do, for many of the perils  besetting the dense vehicle find their commencement on the subtler planes, and are  only the outer manifestations of inner evils. 
Each human being enters into life equipped with a physical and etheric body of  certain constituents, those constituents being the product of a previous incarnation;  they are virtually the body, reproduced exactly, that the man finally left behind him  when death severed him from physical plane existence. The task ahead of everybody  is to take that body, realise its defects and requirements, and then deliberately set in  and build a new body that may prove more adequate to the need of the inner spirit.  This is a task of large dimensions and involves time, stern discipline, self-denial and  judgment. 
The man who undertakes the practice of occult meditation literally "plays with fire." I  wish you to emphasise this statement for it embodies a truth little realised. "Playing  with fire" is an old truth that has lost its significance through flippant repetition, yet it  is absolutely and entirely correct, and is not a symbolic teaching but a plain statement  of fact. Fire forms the basis of all—the Self is fire, the intellect is a phase of fire, and  latent in the microcosmic physical vehicles lies hid a veritable fire that can either be a  destructive force, burning the tissue of the body and stimulating centres of an  undesirable character, or be a vivifying factor, acting as a [Page 103] stimulating and  awakening agent. When directed along certain prepared channels, this fire may act as  a purifier and the great connector between the lower and the Higher Self. 
In meditation the student seeks to contact the divine flame that is his Higher Self, and  to put himself likewise en rapport with the fire of the mental plane. When meditation  is forced, or is pursued too violently, before the alignment between the higher and  lower bodies via the emotional is completed, this fire may act on the fire latent at the  base of the spine (that fire called kundalini) and may cause it to circulate too early.  This will produce disruption and destruction instead of vivification and stimulation of  the higher centres. There is a proper geometrical spiralling which this fire should  follow, dependent upon the ray of the student and the key of the vibration of his  higher centres. This fire should only be permitted to circulate under the direct  instruction of the Master and consciously distributed by the student himself, following  the specific oral instructions of the teacher. Sometimes the fire may be aroused and  spiral with correctness without the student knowing what is occurring on the physical  plane; but on the inner planes he knows and has but failed to bring the knowledge  through to the physical plane consciousness.
Let us take up for a moment the three dangers that principally beset the physical  vehicles. I would like to point out that I deal with the trouble in its extreme, and that  there are many intermediate stages of risk and trouble that attack the unwary student. 
Dangers to the physical brain. 
The brain suffers principally in two ways:— 
From congestion, causing a suffusion of the blood [Page 104] vessels and a  consequent strain upon the delicate brain tissue. This may result in permanent injury,  and may even cause imbecility. It shows in the initial stages as numbness and fatigue,  and if the student persists in meditation when these conditions are sensed the result  will be serious. At all times a student should guard against continuing his meditation  when any fatigue is felt, and should stop at the first indications of trouble. All these  dangers can be guarded against by the use of common-sense, and by remembering  that the body must ever be trained gradually and be built slowly. In the scheme of the  Great Ones, hurry has no place. 
From insanity. This evil has often been seen in earnest students who persist in unwise  pressure or seek unguardedly to arouse the sacred fire through breathing exercises and  similar practices; they pay the price of their rashness through the loss of their reason.  The fire does not proceed in due geometrical form, the necessary triangles are not  made, and the electrical fluid rushes with ever increasing speed and heat upwards, and  literally burns away all or part of the brain tissue, thus bringing about insanity and  sometimes death. 
When these things are more widely comprehended and openly acknowledged, doctors  and brain specialists will study with greater care and accuracy the electrical condition  of the spinal column, and correlate its condition with that of the brain. Good results  will thus be achieved. 
Dangers to the nervous system. 
The troubles connected with the nervous system are more frequent than those  attacking the brain, such as insanity and disruption of the brain tissue. Almost all who  undertake meditation are conscious of an effect in [Page 105] the nervous system;  sometimes it takes the form of sleeplessness, of excitability, of a strained energy and  restlessness that permit of no relaxation; of an irritability that has been foreign  perhaps to the disposition until meditation was pursued; of a nervous reaction—such  as a twitching of the limbs, the fingers or the eyes—of depression or a lowering of the  vitality, and of many individual modes of showing tension and nervousness, differing  according to nature and temperament. This display of nervousness may be either  severe or slight, but I seek earnestly to point out it is quite needless, provided the  student adheres to the rules of common-sense, that he studies wisely his own  temperament, and that he does not blindly proceed with forms and methods but insists  on knowing the raison d'etre of instituted action. If occult students disciplined the life  more wisely, if they studied the food problem more carefully, if they took the needed  hours of sleep with more determination, and if they worked with cautious slowness  and not so much from impulse (no matter how high the aspiration) greater results 
would be seen and the Great Ones would have more efficient helpers in the work of  serving the world. 
It is not my purpose in these letters to take up specifically the diseases of the brain  and of the nervous system. I only desire to give general indications and warnings and  (for your encouragement) to point out that later when the wise Teachers move among  men and openly teach in specific schools, many forms of brain trouble and of nervous  complaints will be cured through meditation wisely adjusted to the individual need.  Proper meditations will be set to stimulate quiescent centres, to turn the inner fire to  proper channels, to distribute the divine heat in equable arrangement, to build in tissue  [Page 106] and to heal. The time for this is not yet, though it lies not so far ahead as  you might imagine. 
Dangers to the sex organs. 
The danger of the over-stimulation of these organs is well recognised theoretically,  and I do not purpose to enlarge on it greatly today. I but seek to point out that this  danger is very real. The reason is that in the overstimulation of these centres the inner  fire is but following the line of least resistance, owing to the polarisation of the race as  a whole. The work, therefore, that the student has to do is twofold:— 
a—He has to withdraw his consciousness from those centres; this is no easy task for it  means working against the results of age-long development. 
b—He has to direct the attention of the creative impulse to the mental plane. In so  doing, if successful, he will turn the activity of the divine fire to the throat centre and  its corresponding head centre, instead of to the lower organs of generation. Therefore,  it will be apparent to you why—unless a man is very advanced—it is not wise to  spend much time in meditation during the earlier years. There was wisdom in the old  Brahmanical rule that a man must give his early years to household endeavour, and  only when he had fulfilled his function as a man could he go on to the life of the  devotee. This was the rule for the average. With advanced egos, pupils and disciples,  it is not so, and each must then work out his own individual problem. 
July 29, 1920. 
Dangers arising from the Karma of the student. 
These as you know may he grouped under three heads, as follows: 
[Page 107]  
l—Those incidental to the karma of his present life. 
2—Those based on his national heredity and his type of body. 
3—Those attendant on his group affiliations, whether on the physical plane and so  exoteric, or on the subtle planes and so esoteric. 
Just what do you mean by the "karma of the student?" We use words lightly, and I  presume that the thoughtless reply would be that the student's karma is the inevitable  happenings of the present or the future that he cannot evade. This is somewhat right, 
but is only one aspect of the whole. Let us look at the matter first in a large manner,  for oft in the just apprehension of big outlines comes comprehension of the small. 
When our Logos founded the solar system He drew within the circle of manifestation  matter sufficient for His project, and material adequate for the object He had in view.  He had not all possible objects in view for this one solar system: he had some  specific aim that necessitated some specific vibration and required therefore certain  differentiated material. This circle that we term the systemic or solar "ring-pass-not"  bounds all that transpires within our system, and contains within its bounds our dual  manifestation. All within that ring vibrates to a certain key-measure, and conforms to  certain rules with the aim in view of the achievement of a particular goal, and the  attainment of a certain end, known in its entirety only to the Logos Himself. All  within that circle is subject to specific rules and governed by a certain key measure,  and might be regarded as being subject to the karma of that sevenfold periodic  existence, and actuated by causes dating back prior to the ringing of that circle, thus  linking our system to its forerunner and affiliating it with that which will come [Page  108] after. Not an isolated unit are we, but part of a greater whole, governed in our  totality by cosmic law and working out (as a whole) certain definite aims. 
Microcosmic purpose. 
So it is with the Microcosm. The Ego on his own plane and on a tiny scale, repeats  the action of the Logos. For certain ends he builds a certain form; he gathers certain  material, and aims at a definite consummation that shall be the result of that gathered  material vibrating to a certain measure, governed in one specific life by certain rules  and aiming at some one particular object,—not all possible objects. 
Each Personality is to the Ego what the solar system is to the Logos. It is his field of  manifestation and the method whereby he attains a demonstrable object. That aim  may be the acquirement of virtue by paying the price of vice; it may be the attainment  of business acumen by the struggle to provide the necessities of life; it may be the  development of sensitiveness by the revealing cruelties of nature; it may be the  building in of unselfish devotion by the appeal of needy dependents; or it may be the  transmutation of desire by the method of meditation on the path. It is for each soul to  find out. What I want to impress upon you is the fact that there is a certain danger  incident to this very factor. If, for instance, in the acquirement of the mental capacity  to meditate, the student misses the very thing he came into the physical body to  acquire, the result is not so much a gain as an unequal development and a temporary  loss of time. 
Let us be specific and illustrate:—An Ego has formed his three-fold body of  manifestation and set his ring-pass-not with the purpose in view of building into his [Page 109] causal body the faculty of "mental apprehension of the basic facts of life."  The object of that one incarnation is to develop the mental capacity of the student; to  teach him concrete facts and science and thus to enlarge the content of his mental  body, with a view to future work. He may be over-developed on the heart side, too  much of the devotee; he may have spent many lives in dreaming dreams and in seeing  visions and in mystic meditation. To be practical, full of common sense, to know the curriculum of the Hall of Learning and to apply practically the knowledge learnt on  the physical plane is his great need. Yet, even though his ring-pass-not seems to 
proscribe and limit his inherent tendencies, and even though the stage is set so that it would seem he must learn the lessons of practical living in the world, he learns not,  but follows what is to him the line of least resistance. He dreams his dreams, and  stays aloof from world affairs; he does not fulfil the desire of the Ego, but misses  opportunity; he suffers much, and in the next life is necessitated a similar staging and  a stronger urge, and a closer ring-pass-not until he complies with the will of his Ego. 
For such an one, meditation helps not, but mainly hinders. As before I have said,  meditation (to be wisely undertaken) is for those who have reached a point in  evolution where the rounding out of the causal body is somewhat matured and where  the student is in one of the final grades in the Hall of Learning. You need to  remember that I refer not here to the mystic meditation but to the scientifically occult  meditation. The dangers are, therefore, practically those of wasted time, of an  intensification of a vibration out of ill proportion to the key of the other vibrations,  and of an unequal rounding out and a lop-sided building that will necessitate  reconstructing in other lives. 
[Page 110]  
July 30, 1920. 
Dangers based on national heredity and type of body. 
...As you may well imagine it is not my purpose to enlarge upon the dangers  incidental to a defective body, save in general terms to lay down the ruling that where  there is definite disease, congenital trouble or mental weakness of any kind,  meditation is not the part of discretion, but may serve but to intensify the trouble. I  wish specifically to point out for the guidance of future students and as a prophetic  statement, that in days to come when the science of meditation is more  comprehended, two factors will be wisely weighed and considered before assigning a  meditation. These factors are: 
a—The man's subrace characteristics. 
b—His type of body, whether it is oriental or occidental. 
In this way, certain disasters will be avoided and certain troubles obviated that are  now found in a more or less degree in every occult group. 
It is generally recognised that each race has for its predominant feature some one  outstanding quality of the emotional body. This is the general rule. In contrasting the  Italian and the Teutonic racial differences, those differences are summed up in our  minds in terms of the emotional body. We think of the Italian as fiery, romantic,  unstable and brilliant; we think of the Teuton as phlegmatic, matter-of-fact,  sentimental and stolidly, logically clever. It will, therefore, be apparent to you that  these different temperaments carry with them their own dangers, and that in the  unwise pursuit of unsuitable meditations, virtues could be emphasised till they  approximated vices, temperamental weaknesses could be intensified till they became  menaces, and consequently [Page 111] lack of balance would result instead of that  attainment of equilibrium and that fine rounding out of the causal body which is one  of the aims in view. When, therefore, the wise Teacher moves among men and  Himself apportions meditation, these racial differences will be weighed and their 
inherent defects will be offset and not intensified. Over-development and  disproportionate attainment will be obviated by the equalising effects of occult  meditation. 
Meditation as followed now and as followed in Atlantean days differs fundamentally.  In the fourth root race an effort was made to facilitate attainment via the atomic  subplane, from the emotional plane to the intuitional, to the practical exclusion of the  mental. It followed the line of the emotions and had a definite effect on the emotional  body. It worked upwards from the emotional instead of, as now, working on mental  levels and from those levels making the effort to control the two lower. In the Aryan  root-race, the attempt is being made to bridge the gap between the higher and the  lower and, by centering the consciousness in the lower mind and later in the causal, to  tap the higher until the downflow from that higher will be continuous. With most of  the advanced students at present all that is felt is occasional rushes of illumination, but  later will be felt a steady irradiation. Both methods carry their own dangers. In  Atlantean days, meditation tended to overstimulation of the emotions and although  men touched great heights, yet they also touched great depths. Sex magic was  unbelievably rampant. The solar plexus was apt to be over vivified, the triangles were  not correctly followed, and the lower centres were caught in the reaction of the fire  with dire results. 
The dangers now are different. The development of [Page 112] mind carries with it  the dangers of selfishness, of pride, of blind forgetfulness of the higher that it is the  aim of the present method to offset. If the adepts of the dark path attained great  powers in Atlantean days they are still more dangerous now. Their control is much  more widespread. Hence the emphasis laid on service, and on the steadying of the  mind as an essential in the man who seeks to progress and to become a member of the  Brotherhood of Light. 
The matter I now seek to give some instruction upon is one of very real importance to  all earnest students at this time. The orient is to the evolving race of men what the  heart is to the human body; it is the source of light, of life, of heat, and of vitality.  The occident is to the race what the brain or mental activity is to the body,—the  directing organising factor, the instrument of the lower mind, the accumulator of  facts. The difference in the entire, "make-up" (as you term it) of the oriental and of  the European or American is so great and so well recognised that it is mayhap  needless for me to dwell upon it. 
The oriental is philosophical, naturally dreamy, trained through centuries to think in  abstract terms, fond of obstruse dialectics, temperamentally lethargic, and climatically  slow. Ages of metaphysical thinking, of vegetarian living, of climatic inertia and of a  rigid adherence to forms and to the strictest rules of living have produced a product  the exact opposite of his occidental brother. 
The occidental is practical, businesslike, dynamic, quick in action, a slave to  organization (which is after all but another form of ceremonial), actuated by a very  concrete mind, acquisitive, critical, and at his best when affairs move quickly and  rapid mental decision is required. He detests abstract thought yet appreciates it when  apprehended, and when he can make those thoughts [Page 113] facts on the physical  plane. He uses his head more than his heart centre, and his throat centre is apt to be 
vitalised. The oriental uses his heart centre more than the head and necessarily the  corresponding head centres. The centre at the top of the spine at the base of the skull  functions more actively than the throat. 
The oriental progresses by the withdrawing of the centre of consciousness to the head  through strenuous meditation. That is the centre that he needs to master, he learns by  the wise use of mantrams, by retiring into seclusion, by isolation and by the careful  following of specific forms for many hours each day for many days. 
The occidental has in view the withdrawal of his consciousness to the heart at first, for  already he works so much with the head centres. He works more by the use of  collective forms and not individual mantrams; he does not work so much in isolation  as his oriental brother, but has to find his centre of consciousness even in the noise  and whirl of business life and in the throngs of great cities. He employs collective  forms for the attainment of his ends, and the awakening of the heart centre shows  itself in service. Hence the emphasis laid in the Occident on the heart meditation and  the subsequent life of service. 
You will see, therefore, that when the real occult work is begun, the method may  differ—and will necessarily differ—in the east and in the west, but the goal will be  the same. It must be borne in mind, for instance, that a meditation that would aid the  development of an oriental, might bring danger and disaster to his western brother.  The reverse would also be the case. But always the goal will be the same. Forms  may be individual or collective, mantrams may be chanted by units or by groups,  different centres may be the object of specialised attention, yet [Page 114] the results  will be identical. Danger arises when the occidental bases his endeavour on rules that  suffice for the oriental, as has at times been so wisely pointed out. In the wisdom of  the Great Ones this danger is being offset. Different methods for different races,  diverse forms for those of various nationalities, but the same wise guides on the inner  planes, the same great Hall of Wisdom, the same Gate of Initiation, admitting all into  the inner sanctuary.... 
In concluding this subject, I seek to give a hint:—The seventh Ray of Ceremonial  Law or Order (the ray now coming into power) provides for the occidental what has  long been the privilege of the oriental. Great is the day of opportunity, and in the  sweeping onward of this seventh force comes the needed impetus that may—if rightly  grasped—drive to the Feet of the Lord of the World the dweller in the occident. 
August 2, 1920. 
Dangers attendant on group affiliations. 
Very briefly would I seek this morning to take up the question of the dangers involved  in meditation that are incidental to a man's group affiliations, whether exoteric or  esoteric. There is not much that can be said on this particular matter, save broad  indications. Each of these various subjects that I have touched upon might warrant  the writing of a weighty treatise, and I shall not, therefore, attempt to cover what  might be said but only point out certain aspects of the matter that will (if pondered on  with care) open up to the earnest seeker after truth many avenues of knowledge. All  occult training has this in view,—to give to the pupil some seed thought which (when 
brooded over in the silence of his own heart) [Page 115] will produce much fruit of  real value, and which the pupil can then conscientiously consider his own. What we  produce through wrestling and strenuous endeavour remains forever our own, and  vanishes not into forgetfulness as do the thoughts that enter through the eye from the  printed page, or through the ear from the lips of any teacher no matter how revered. 
One thing that is oft overlooked by the pupil when he enters upon the path of  probation and starts meditation is that the goal ahead for him is not primarily the  completing of his own development, but his equipping for service to humanity. His  own growth and development are necessarily incidental but are not the goal. His  immediate environment and his close associates on the physical plane are his  objectives in service, and if in the endeavour to attain certain qualifications and  capacities he overlooks the groups to which he is affiliated and neglects to serve  wisely and to spend himself loyally on their behalf he runs the danger of  crystallisation, falls under the spell of sinful pride, and mayhap even takes the first  step toward the left-hand path. Unless inner growth finds expression in group service  the man treads a dangerous road. 
Three types of affiliated groups. 
Perhaps I could here give some indications of the groups on the various planes to  which a man is assigned. These groups are many and diverse and at different periods  of a man's life may change and differ, as he works out from under the obligating  karma that governs the affiliations. Let us remember too that as a man enlarges his  capacity to serve he at the same time increases the size and number of the groups he  contacts till he reaches a point in some later incarnation when the world [Page 116]  itself is his sphere of service and the multitude those whom he assists. He has to serve  in a threefold manner before he is permitted to change his line of action and pass on to  other work,—planetary. systemic or cosmic. 
a—He serves first through activity, through the use of his intelligence, using the high  faculties of mind and the product of his genius to aid the sons of men. He builds  slowly great powers of intellect and in the building overcomes the snare of pride. He  takes, then, that active intelligence of his and lays it at the feet of collective humanity,  giving of his best for the helping of the race. 
b—He serves through love, becoming, as time elapses, one of the saviours of men,  spending his life and giving of his all through perfect love of his brothers. A life then  comes when the utmost sacrifice is made and in love he dies that others may live. 
c—He serves then through power. Proved in the furnace to have no thought save the  good of all around, he is trusted with the power that follows from active love  intelligently applied. He works with the law, and bends all his will to make the power  of the law felt in the three-fold realms of death. 
In all these three branches of service you will notice that the faculty of working with  groups is one of paramount importance. These groups are diverse, as before I have  said, and vary on different planes. Let us briefly enumerate them:— 
1—On the physical plane. The following groups will be found:—
a—His family group to which he is usually affiliated for two reasons, one to work out  karma and repay his debts; the second, to receive a certain type of physical vehicle  that the Ego needs for adequate expression. 
[Page 117]  
b—His associates and friends; the people his environment throws him with, his  business associates, his church affiliations, his acquaintances and casual friends, and  the people he touches for a brief period and then sees no more. His work with them is  twofold again; first to repay an obligation should such a debt have been incurred; and  secondly to test out his powers to influence for good those around him, to recognise  responsibility and to direct or help. In doing thus, the Guides of the race find out the  actions and reactions of a man, his capacity for service, and his response to any  surrounding need. 
c—His associated band of servers, the group under some Great One that is definitely  united for work of an occult and spiritual nature. It may be either a band of church  workers among the orthodox (beginners are tried out here); it may be in social work  such as in the labor movements or in the political arena; or it may be in the more  definitely pioneer movements of the world, such as the Theosophical Society, the  Christian Science movement, the New Thought workers and the Spiritualists. I would  add to this, one branch of endeavour that may surprise you,—I mean the movement of  the Soviet in Russia and all the aggressive radical bodies that sincerely serve under their leaders (even when misguided and unbalanced) for the betterment of the  condition of the masses. 
Thus on the physical plane you have three groups to which a man belongs. He owes a  duty to them and he must play his part. Now wherein could danger enter through  meditation? Simply in this: that as long as a man's karma holds him to some  particular group the thing that he must aim at is to play his part perfectly, so that he  may work out from under karmic obligation [Page 118] and advance toward ultimate  liberation; besides this he must carry on his group with him to greater heights and  usefulness. Therefore, if through meditation of an unsuitable nature he neglects his  proper obligation he delays the purpose of his life, and in another incarnation he will  have to play it out. If he builds into that group's causal body (the composite product  of the several lines) aught that has not its place properly there, he aids not but hinders,  and again that involves danger. Let me illustrate, for clarity is desired:—A student is  affiliated with a group that has an over-preponderance of devotees, and he has come  in for the express purpose of balancing that quality with another factor, that of wise  discrimination and mental balance. If he permits himself to be overcome by the group  thoughtform and becomes himself a devotee, following a devotional meditation and  unwisely omitting to balance that group's causal body, he runs into a danger that hurts  not only himself but the group to which he belongs. 
2—On the emotional plane: Here he belongs to several groups such as:— 
a—His emotional plane family group, which is more thoroughly his own group than  the family into which he happens to be born on the physical plane. You will see this  demonstrated many times in life when members of an emotional plane family contact  each other on the physical plane. Instant recognition ensues.
b—The class within the Hall of Learning to which he is assigned and in which he  receives much instruction. 
c—The band of Invisible Helpers with whom he may be working and the band of  Servers. 
All these groups involve obligation and work and all must be allowed for in studying  the wise use of meditation. [Page 119] Meditation should increase a man's capacity to  discharge his karmic debts, giving clear vision, wise judgment and a comprehension  of the work of the immediate moment. Anything that militates against this is  dangerous. 
3—On the mental plane: The groups to be found there may be enumerated as  follows: 
a—The groups of pupils of some one Master to Whom he may be attached, and with  Whom he may be working. This is usually only the case when the man is rapidly  working out his karma and is nearing the entrance to the Path. His meditation,  therefore, should be directly under the guidance of his Master, and any formula  followed that is not adjusted to a man's need carries with it elements of danger, for the  vibrations set up on the mental plane and the forces engendered there are so much  more potent than on the lower levels. 
b—The egoic group to which he belongs. This is most important for it involves the  consideration of the man's ray in the apportioning of meditation. This matter has  already been somewhat touched upon. 
As you will see, I have not specified certain dangers attacking any particular body. It  is not possible to cover the subject thus. In later days, when occult meditation is more  comprehended and the matter scientifically studied, students will prepare the  necessary data and treatises covering the entire subject as far as then may be. I sound,  however, a note of warning, I indicate the way,—the teachers on the inner side  seldom do more. We aim at developing thinkers and men of clear vision, capable of  logical reasoning. To do this we teach men to develop themselves, to do their own  thinking, reason out their own problems, and build their own characters. Such is the  Path.... 
[Page 120]  
August 3, 1920. 
Dangers arising from subtle forces. 
...We have for our topic this morning the final section of our letter on the dangers  incidental to meditation. We have dealt somewhat with individual dangers inherent in  the three bodies; we have touched upon the risks that may be run when the karma of  the student and his group affiliations are overlooked. Today the subject involves real  difficulty. We have to deal with the dangers that may arise from forces and persons,  from entities and groups working on the subtler planes. The difficulty arises in three  ways:—
l—The ignorance of the average student as to the nature of those forces and as to the  personnel of the groups on the subtler planes. 
2—The risk of revealing more than would be wise in an exoteric publication. 
3—An occult risk that is little comprehended by the uninitiated. It lies in the fact that  in the concentration of thought that necessarily arises in discussing these problems,  thought-waves are set in motion, currents are contacted and thoughtforms circulated  that attract the attention of those under discussion. This may lead at times to  undesirable results. Therefore, I shall with brevity touch upon the subject. Upon the  inner planes the needed light and protection are afforded. 
Three groups of entities:— 
These groups of entities can be differentiated in a threefold manner:— 
l—Groups of discarnate beings on either the emotional or the mental planes. 2—Devas, either singly or in groups. 
3—The dark Brotherhood. 
[Page 121]  
Let us take each division and deal with it carefully, first laying the foundation of  knowledge by pointing out that the dangers arise from a threefold condition of the  bodies of the student which may be the result sometimes of meditation. These  conditions are: 
A negative condition that makes the entire three bodies of the personality receptive  and quiescent, and open therefore to the attack of the watching denizens of other  planes. 
A condition of ignorance or foolhardiness that, in attempting to use certain forms and  mantrams without the permission of the Teacher, involves the student with certain  groups of devas, bringing him into contact with the devas of the emotional or mental  planes and making him therefore (through his ignorance) the butt of their attack and  the plaything of their destructive instincts. 
A condition which is the reverse of the above, which makes a man positive and a  channel, therefore, for force or power. When this is the case, the man proceeds, under  occult rule or law and with the aid of his Teacher, to wield the electrical fluid of the  inner planes. He becomes then a centre of the attention of those who strive against  the Brothers of Light. 
The first two conditions are all the result of meditation unwisely and ignorantly  practised, the last state of affairs is frequently the reward of success. In the first two,  the remedy lies within the student himself and in the wise correction of the type of  meditation and its more careful following; in the third case the remedy must be sought  in various ways which I will later indicate. 
Dangers of obsession.
Dangers from discarnate entities are frankly those of obsession, either of a temporary  nature and lasting for a few moments or more enduring and lasting for a longer [Page  122] period. It may even be permanent and lasting through a lifetime. I have earlier  written to you a letter upon this subject which you might here incorporate. We never  duplicate effort if it can be avoided. I seek primarily to emphasise the point that this  
entrance which we call obsession is effected largely through the negative attitude  assumed through the unwise following of an unsuitable meditation. In his anxiety to  be the recipient of light from above, in his determination to force himself to a place  where he can contact the teachers or even the Master, and in his endeavour to  eliminate all thought and lower vibrations, the student makes the mistake of rendering  his entire lower personality receptive. Instead of making it firmly positive to  environing factors and to all lower contacts, and instead of only allowing the "apex of  the mind" (if I may use so unusual a term) to be receptive and open to transmission  from the causal or the abstract levels and even from the intuitional, the student  permits reception from all sides. Only a point within the brain should be receptive, all  the rest of the consciousness should be so polarised that outer interference will not be  possible. This refers to the emotional and to the mental bodies, though with the  majority these days it refers solely to the emotional. At this particular period of the  world's history the emotional plane is so densely populated and the response of the  physical to the emotional is now becoming so exquisitely attuned, that the danger of  obsession is greater than ever heretofore. But for your cheering—the reverse holds  good also, and response to the divine and rapid reaction to the higher inspiration has  never been so great. Divine inspiration or that "divine obsession" which is the  privilege of all advanced souls, will be understood in the coming years as never  before, and will be definitely one of the [Page 123] methods used by the coming Lord  and His Great Ones for the helping of the world. 
The thing to be remembered is that in the case of wrong obsession the man is at the  mercy of the obsessing entity, and is unconsciously or unwillingly a partner in the  transaction. In divine obsession the man consciously and willingly co-operates with  the One Who seeks to inspire, or to occupy or employ his lower vehicles. The motive  is ever the greater helping of the race. The obsession is then not the result of a  negative condition but of a positive collaboration and proceeds under law and for a  specific period....As more and more of the race develop continuity of consciousness  between the physical and the emotional and later the mental, this act of transference  of the vehicles will be more frequent and more understood. 
October 9, 1919. 
Causes of Obsession. 
One of the activities ahead of the occult student is the study and the scientific  observation of this matter. We have been told in various occult books that obsession  and insanity are very closely allied. Insanity may exist in all three bodies, the least  harmful being that of the physical body, whilst the most enduring and the hardest to  cure is that of the mental body. Insanity in the mental body is the heavy fate that  descends upon those who for many incarnations have followed the path of selfish  cruelty, using the intelligence as a means to serve selfish ends and using it willfully,  knowing it to be wrong. But insanity of this type is a means whereby the Ego 
sometimes arrests the progress of a man towards the left-hand path. In this sense it is  a disguised blessing. Let us deal first with the causes of obsession, leaving the subject  of insanity [Page 124] for another day. These causes are four in number and each  responds to a different treatment:— 
One cause is a definite weakness of the etheric double, in the separating web, which  like a piece of relaxed elastic permits entry of an extraneous entity from the emotional  plane. The door of entrance which is formed by this web is not closed tight, and  entrance can be effected from without. This is a physical plane cause, and is the result  of the maladjustment of physical plane matter. It is the result of karma, and is  prenatal, existing from the earliest moment. Usually the sufferer is physically weak,  intellectually feeble, but possessed of a powerful emotional body which suffers and  fights and struggles to prevent entrance. The attacks are intermittent, and more  frequently attack women than men. 
Another cause is due to emotional reasons. A lack of co-ordination exists between the  emotional and the physical and when the man functions in the emotional body (as at  night) the moment of re-entry is attended with difficulty, and opportunity exists for  other beings to enter the physical vehicle, and prevent its occupation by the real Ego.  This is the most common form of obsession, and affects those with powerful physical  bodies and strong astral vibrations, but with weak mental bodies. It leads, in the  ensuing struggle, to the violent scenes of screaming lunatics and to the paroxysms of  the epileptic. Men are more subject to this than women, as women are usually more  definitely polarised in the emotional body. 
A rarer kind of obsession is the mental. In coming days as the mental body develops,  one may expect perhaps to see more of it. Mental obsession involves the  displacement taking place on the mental levels—hence its rarity. The physical body  and the emotional body remain as a unit, but the Thinker is left in his mental body,  [Page 125] whilst the obsessing entity (clothed in mental matter) enters the two lower  vehicles. In the case of emotional obsession the Thinker is left with his emotional  body and his mental body but with no physical. In this latter case he is left with  neither emotional nor physical. The cause lies in the fact of the over-development of  the mental, and of the relative weakness of the emotional and physical bodies. The  Thinker is too powerful for his other bodies and disdains their use; he is too interested  in work on mental levels, and thus gives opportunity to obsessing entities to assume  control. This, as I said before, is rare and is the result of lop-sided development. It  attacks women and men equally; it principally shows itself in childhood and is  difficult to cure. 
A still rarer cause of obsession is definitely the work of the dark Brothers. It takes the  form of snapping the magnetic link that attaches the Ego to the lower physical body,  leaving him in his emotional and mental bodies. This would normally result in the  death of the physical body, but in cases such as these the dark Brother, who is to use  the physical body, enters it and makes connection with his own cord. These cases are  not common. They involve only two classes of people:— 
Those who are highly evolved and on the Path, but who through some wilful  shortcoming fail for some one incarnation and so lay themselves open to the evil  force. Sin (as you call it) in the Personality of a disciple leads to a weakness in some 
one spot, and this is taken advantage of. This type of obsession shows itself in the  transformation that is sometimes seen when a great soul suddenly plunges on an  apparent downward path, when he changes the whole trend of his existence and  besmirches a fair character with mud. It carries with it its own punishment, for on the  inner planes the disciple looks [Page 126] on, and in agony of mind sees his lower  vehicle dishonouring the fair name of its real owner and causing evil to be said of a  loved cause. 
The little evolved, weakly organised, and so unable to resist. 
The Kinds of Obsessing Entities. 
These are too numerous to mention in detail but I might enumerate a few. 
l—Discarnate entities of a low order awaiting incarnation, and who see, in cases one  and two, their wanted opportunity. 
2—Suicides, anxious to undo the deed and to again get into contact with earth. 
3—Earth-bound spirits, good and bad, who from anxiety over loved ones, over their  business affairs, or eager to do some wrong or to undo some evil act, rush in and take  possession of cases one and two. 
4—Dark Brothers as aforesaid, who avail themselves principally of the third and  fourth cases already cited. They require highly developed bodies, having no use for  weak or unrefined bodies. In case three the weakness is entirely relative, due to over accentuation of the mental vehicle. 
5—Elementals and subhuman entities of a malicious nature who rush in on the  slightest opportunity and where kindred vibration may be felt. 
6—Some of the lower devas, harmless but mischievous who, from sheer freakishness  and fun, enter another body in much the same way that a child loves to dress up. 
7—Occasional visitors from other planets who enter certain highly evolved bodies for  purposes of their own. This is very, very rare.... 
[Page 127]  
Let me now give you some of the methods that eventually will be the first attempts at  cure. 
In the first type of cases, those due to physical plane weakness, the stress of the cure  will be laid first on building up a strong physical body in both its departments, though  especially the etheric body. This will be done in future years with the direct aid of the  devas of the shadows (the violet devas or devas of the ethers). The strengthening of  the etheric web will be aided by means of the violet light, with its corresponding  sound, administered in quiet sanitariums. Coincident with this treatment will be the  attempt to strengthen the mental body. With the strengthening of the physical body  will come longer and longer periods of freedom from attack. Eventually the attacks  will cease altogether.
When the cause is lack of co-ordination between the physical and the emotional  vehicles the first methods of cure will be definite exorcism by the aid of mantrams  and ceremonial (such as religious ritual). Qualified persons will use these mantrams  at night when the obsessing entity may be supposed to be absent during the hours of  sleep. Those mantrams will call the real owner back, will build a protective wall after  his re-entry and will seek to force the obsessing one to stay absent. When the real  owner has returned, the work then will be to keep him there. Educative work during  the day and protective measures at night for longer or shorter periods will gradually  eliminate the evil occupant, or unwanted tenant, and in the course of time the sufferer  will continue to procure immunity. More anent this can later be given. 
Where mental obsession is involved the matter is more difficult. Most of the first  cures achieved in the future will centre around the first two groups. Mental obsession  must await greater knowledge, though experimentation [Page 128] from the very first  should be undertaken. The work will have to be done mostly from the mental plane  by those who can function there freely and so contact the Thinker in his mental body.  The co-operation of the Thinker must then be procured and a definite attack  conjointly made on the obsessed physical and emotional bodies. During the night  much of the work in the first two cases of cures will be done, but in the latter case the  Thinker has to win back his physical and his emotional bodies as well, hence the  exceeding difficulty. Death often eventuates in these cases. 
In the severing of the magnetic cord naught can be done as yet. 
Dangers from the deva evolution. 
This second point is more complex. You will remember how it has been said earlier  in these letters that contact with the devas can be brought about through specific  forms and mantrams and that in this contact lies peril for the unwary. This danger is  curiously real now, owing to the following reasons: 
a—The coming in of the violet ray, the seventh or Ceremonial Ray, has rendered this  contact more easy of attainment than heretofore. It is therefore the ray on which  approximation is possible, and in the use of ceremonial and of set forms, coupled to  regulated rhythmic movement, will be found a meeting place for the two allied  evolutions. In the use of ritual this will be apparent, and psychics are already bearing  witness to the fact that both in the ritual of the Church and in that of Masonry this has  been evidenced. More and more will this be the case, and it carries with it certain  risks that will inevitably work themselves into common knowledge and thus affect in  various ways the unwary sons of men. [Page 129] As you know, a definite effort is  being made at this time by the Planetary Hierarchy to communicate to the devas their  part in the scheme of things, and the part the human family must likewise play. The  work is slow, and certain results are inevitable. It is not my purpose to take up with  you in these letters the part that ritual and set mantric forms play in the evolution of  devas and of men. I only desire to point out that danger for human beings lies in the  unwise use of forms for the calling of the devas, in experimenting with the Sacred  Word with the object in view of contacting the Builders who are so largely affected  by it, and in endeavouring to pry into the secrets of ritual with its adjuncts of colour  and of sound. Later on, when the pupil has passed the portal of initiation, such 
knowledge will be his, coupled with the necessary information that teaches him to  work with the law. In the following of the law, no danger lurks. 
b—The race is possessed of a strong determination to penetrate within the veil, and to  find out what lies on the other side of the unknown. Men and women everywhere are  conscious within themselves of budding powers which meditation enhances. They  find that by the careful following of certain rules they become more sensitive to the  sights and sounds of the inner planes. They catch fleeting glimpses of the unknown;  occasionally and at rare intervals, the organ of inner vision temporarily opens and  they hear and see on the astral or the mental plane. They see devas at a meeting in  which ritual has been employed; they catch a sound or a voice that tells them truths  that they recognise as true. The temptation to force the issue, to prolong meditation,  to try out certain methods that promise intensification of psychic faculty is too strong.  They unwarily force matters and dire disaster results. One hint here I give:—In  meditation [Page 130] it is literally possible to play with fire. The devas of the mental  levels manipulate the latent fires of the system and thus incidentally the latent fires of  the inner man. It is woefully possible to be the plaything of their endeavour and to  perish at their hands. A truth I speak here; I give not voice to the interesting chimeras  of a fanciful brain. Beware of playing with fire. 
c—This transition period is largely responsible for much of the danger. The right  type of body for the holding and the handling of the occult force has not yet been  built, and in the interim the bodies now in use but spell disaster to the ambitious  student. When a man starts out to follow the path of occult meditation, it takes well nigh fourteen years to rebuild the subtle bodies, and incidentally the physical. All  through that period it is not safe to tamper with the unknown for only the very strong  refined physical body, the controlled stable and equalised emotional body and the  properly striated mental body can enter into the subtler planes and literally work with  Fohat, for that is what the occult does. Therefore is the emphasis laid by all wise  Teachers everywhere on the Path of Purification, which must precede the Path of  Illumination. They lay the emphasis on the building in of spiritual faculty before  psychic faculty can be safely permitted; they demand service to the race every day  throughout the scope of life before a man may be permitted to manipulate the forces  of nature, to dominate the elementals, to co-operate with the devas, and to learn the  forms and ceremonies, the mantrams and the key-words, that will bring those forces  within the circle of manifestation. 
August 4, 1920. 
Danger from the Dark Brothers. 
I think I gave you earlier practically all that I can as [Page 131] yet impart anent the  Brothers of Darkness, as they are sometimes termed. I only want at this point to lay  emphasis upon the fact that no danger need be feared by the average student from this  source. It is only as discipleship is approached and a man stands out ahead of his  fellows as an instrument of the White Brotherhood that he attracts the attention of  those who seek to withstand. When through application to meditation, and power and  activity in service, a man has developed his vehicles to a point of real achievement,  then his vibrations set in motion matters of a specific kind, and he learns to work with  that matter, to manipulate the fluids, and to control the builders. In so doing he 
encroaches on the domain of those who work with the forces of involution and thus he  may bring attack upon himself. This attack may be directed against any of his three  vehicles and may be of different kinds. Let me briefly point out some of the methods  employed against a disciple which are the ones which alone concern the student of  these letters: 
a—Definite attack on the physical body. All kinds of means are employed to hinder  the usefulness of the disciple through disease or the crippling of his physical body.  Not all accidents are the result of karma, for the disciple has usually surmounted a  good deal of that type of karma and is thus comparatively free from that source of  hindrance in active work. 
b—Glamour is another method used, or the casting over the disciple of a cloud of  emotional or mental matter which suffices to hide the real, and to temporarily obscure  that which is true. The study of the cases wherein glamour has been employed is  exceedingly revealing and demonstrates how hard it is for even an advanced disciple  always to discriminate between the real and the false, the true and the untrue.  Glamour may be either on the [Page 132] emotional or mental levels but is usually on  the former. One form employed is to cast over the disciple the shadows of the  thought of weakness or discouragement or criticism to which he may at intervals give  way. Thus cast, they loom in undue proportion and the unwary disciple, not realising  that he is but seeing the gigantic outlines of his own momentary and passing thoughts,  gives way to discouragement, aye even to despair, and becomes of little use to the  Great Ones. Another form is to throw into his mental aura suggestions and ideas  purporting to come from his own Master but which are but subtle suggestions that  hinder and help not. It takes a wise disciple always to discriminate between the voice  of his real Teacher and the false whispers of the masquerading one, and even high  initiates have been temporarily misled. 
Many and subtle are the means used to deceive and thereby curtail the effective output  of the worker in the field of the world. Wisely therefore have all aspirants been  enjoined to study and work at the development of viveka or that discrimination which  safeguards from deception. If this quality is laboriously built in and cultivated in all  events, big and little, in the daily life, the risks of being led astray will be nullified. 
c—A third method frequently employed is to envelop the disciple in a thick cloud of  darkness, to surround him with an impenetrable night and fog through which he  stumbles and often falls. It may take the form of a black cloud of emotional matter, of  some dark emotion that seems to imperil all stable vibration and plunges the  bewildered student into a blackness of despair; he feels that all is departing from him;  he is a prey to varied and dismal emotions; he deems himself forsaken of all; he  considers that all past effort has been futile and that naught remains but to die. At  such times he needs much the gift [Page 133] of viveka, and to earnestly weigh up  and calmly reason out the matter. He should at these times remind himself that the  darkness hides naught from the God within, and that the stable centre of  consciousness remains there, untouched by aught that may betide. He should  persevere until the end,—the end of what? The end of the enveloping cloud, the point  where it merges itself into sunlight; he should pass through its length and out into the  daylight, realising that nothing can at any time reach to and hurt the inner  consciousness. God is within, no matter what transpires without. We are so apt to 
look out at environing circumstances, whether physical, astral or mental, and to forget  that the inmost centre of the heart hides our points of contact with the Universal  Logos. 
d—Finally (for I cannot touch on all the methods used), the means employed may be  to cast a mental darkness over the disciple. The darkness may be intellectual, and is  consequently still more difficult to penetrate, for in this case the power of the Ego  must be called in, whereas in the former frequently the calm reasoning of the lower  mind may suffice to dispel the trouble. Here, in this specific case, the disciple will be  wise if he not only attempts to call his Ego or Higher Self for the dispelling of the  cloud, but calls likewise upon his Teacher, or even upon his Master, for the assistance  that they can give. 
These are but a few of the dangers encircling the aspirant, and I hint at them solely for  the purpose of warning and guidance, and not to cause alarm. You can here  interpolate the earlier letter with the rules that I there give for the assistance of the  disciple. 
September 25, 1919. 
The Dark Brotherhood. 
Today I seek to speak to you on the powers of the Dark Brotherhood. Certain laws  that govern their actions, [Page 134] certain methods employed by them in work need  to be realised and certain methods of protection apprehended and utilised. As before I  have told you the danger is as yet inappreciable to the majority, but more and more as  time elapses shall we find it necessary to teach you, the physical plane workers, how  to shield and guard yourselves from attack. 
The Dark Brothers are—remember this always—brothers, erring and misguided yet  still sons of the one Father though straying far, very far, into the land of distances.  The way back for them will be long, but the mercy of evolution inevitably forces them  back along the path of return in cycles far ahead. Anyone who over-exalts the  concrete mind and permits it continuously to shut out the higher, is in danger of  straying on the left-hand path. Many so stray...but come back, and then in the future  avoid like errors in the same way as a child once burnt avoids the fire. It is the man  who persists in spite of warning and of pain who eventually becomes a brother of  darkness. Mightily fights the Ego at first to prevent the Personality so developing, but  the deficiencies of the causal body (for forget not that our vices are but our virtues  misused) result in a lop-sided causal body, over-developed in some direction and full  of great gulfs and gaps where virtues should be. 
The dark brother recognises no unity with his species, only seeing in them people to  be exploited for the furtherance of his own ends. This then, on a small scale, is the  mark of those who are being used by them wittingly or unwittingly. They respect no  person, they regard all men as fair prey, they use everyone to get their own way  enforced, and by fair means or foul they seek to break down all opposition and for the  personal self acquire that which they desire. 
[Page 135] 
The dark brother considers not what suffering he may cause; he cares not what agony  of mind he brings upon an opponent; he persists in his intention and desists not from  the hurt of any man, woman or child, provided that in the process his own ends are  furthered. Expect absolutely no mercy from those opposing the Brotherhood of Light. 
On the physical plane and on the emotional plane, the dark brother has more power  than the Brother of the Light,—not more power per se but more apparent power,  because the White Brothers choose not to exert Their power on those two planes, as do the Dark Brothers. They could exert Their authority but They choose to refrain,  working with the powers of evolution and not of involution. The elemental forces to  be found on these two planes are manipulated by two factors. 
a—The inherent forces of evolution that direct all on to eventual perfection. The  White Adepts co-operate in this. 
b—The Dark Brothers who occasionally employ these elemental forces to wreak their  will and vengeance on all opponents. Under their control work sometimes the  elementals of the earth plane, the gnomes and the elemental essence as found in evil  form, some of the brownies, and the fairy folk of colours brown, grey and sombre hued. They cannot control the devas of high development, nor the fairies of colours  blue, green and yellow, though a few of the red fairies can be made to work under  their direction. The water elementals (though not the sprites or sylphs) move on  occasion to their assistance, and in the control of these forces of involution they at  times damage the furtherance of our work. 
[Page 136]  
Oft too the Dark Brother masquerades as an agent of the light, oft he poses as a  messenger of the gods, but for your assurance I would say that he who acts under the  guidance of the Ego will have clear vision, and will escape deception. 
At this time their power is ofttimes mighty. Why? Because so much exists as yet in  the Personalities of all men that respond to their vibration, and so it is easy for them to  affect the bodies of men. So few of the races, comparatively speaking, have as yet  built in the higher vibration that responds to the key-note of the Brotherhood of Light,  who move practically entirely on the two highest levels (or the atomic and sub-atomic  subplane) of the mental, emotional and physical planes. When moving on these  subplanes the attacks of elementals on lower planes may be felt but effect no harm,  hence the necessity of pure living and controlled pure emotions and elevated thought. 
You will notice that I said that the power of the Dark Brotherhood is dominant  apparently on the physical and emotional planes. Not so is it on the mental, which is  the plane on which the Brothers of the Light work. Mighty dark magicians may be  located on the lower mental levels, but on the higher, the White Lodge dominates, the  three higher subplanes being the levels that They beg the evolving sons of men to  seek; it is Their region, to which all must strive and aspire. The Dark Brother  impresses his will on human beings (if analogous vibration exists) and on the  elemental kingdoms of involution. The Brothers of Light plead as pleaded the Man of  Sorrows for an erring humanity to rise upward to the light. The Dark Brother retards  progress and shapes all to his own ends; the Brother of Light bends every effort to the  hastening [Page 137] of evolution and—foregoing all that might be His as the price of 
achievement—stays amid the fogs, the strife, the evil and the hatred of the period if,  in so doing, He may by all means aid some, and (lifting them up out of the darkness of  earth) set their feet upon the Mount, and enable them to surmount the Cross. 
And now what methods may be employed to safeguard the worker in the field of the  world? What can be done to ensure his safety in the present strife and in the greater  strife of the coming centuries? 
1—A realisation that purity of all the vehicles is the prime essential. If a Dark  Brother gains control over any man it but shows that that man has in his life some  weak spot. The door whereby entrance is effected must be opened by the man  himself; the opening whereby malignant force can be poured in must be caused by the  occupant of the vehicles. Therefore the need of scrupulous cleanliness of the physical  body, of clean steady emotions permitted in the emotional body, and of purity of  thought in the mental body. When this is so, co-ordination will be present in the  lower vehicles and the indwelling Thinker himself permits no entrance. 
2—The elimination of all fear. The forces of evolution vibrate more rapidly than  those of involution and in this fact lies a recognisable security. Fear causes weakness;  weakness causes a disintegration; the weak spot breaks and a gap appears, and  through that gap evil force may enter. The factor of entrance is the fear of the man  himself, who opens thus the door. 
3—A standing firm and unmoved, no matter what occurs. Your feet may be bathed in  the mud of earth, but your head may be bathed in the sunshine of the higher regions.  Recognition of the filth of earth involves not contamination. 
[Page 138]  
4—A Recognition of the use of common-sense and the application of this common sense to the matter in hand. Sleep much and, in sleeping, learn to render the body  positive; keep busy on the emotional plane and achieve the inner calm. Do naught to  overtire the body physical, and play whenever possible. In hours of relaxation comes  the adjustment that obviates later tension. 
[Page 139]  
LETTER VI - THE USE OF FORM IN MEDITATION 
LETTER VI 
THE USE OF FORM IN MEDITATION. 
a—The Use of Form in raising the consciousness. 
b—The Use of Form by the mystic and the occultist. 
c—Specific Forms. 
d—The Use of Form collectively.
[Page 140]  
LETTER VI 
THE USE OF FORM IN MEDITATION. 
August 6, 1920. 
Your very natural desire to have me give you in this sixth letter certain specific forms  to achieve certain results cannot be fully acquiesced in. I do not propose to outline for  you any forms for careful following. The risks, as before I have pointed out, are too  great apart from the supervision of a teacher at hand to watch reactions. These forms  may later be given. The work is duly planned out for the coming generation of  students, this series of letters having its place within that outline. What I intend to do  today is something different. I purpose to do four things which we will separately  take up and elucidate. These things, if duly assimilated and acted upon, will lead to  further enlightenment. In the occult method of teaching step by step is given, point by  point slowly laid before the pupil, and only as each step is taken and each point is  grasped, will the next in order become clear. The teacher gives an indication, drops a  hint, and touches some high light. The pupil follows the point emphasised, and finds  on thus acting that further light pours in, another stage appears and other hints are  dropped. In joint action and reaction therefore the occult student is trained by the  occultist. 
In studying the topic, "The use of form in meditation," the four divisions under which  I seek to place the intended data are as follows:— 
1—The use of Form in raising the consciousness. 
2.—The use of Form by the mystic and the occultist. 
[Page 141]  
3—The use of specific forms for specific ends. 
4—The use of Form collectively. 
In the exposition of these subjects you will see that what I am endeavouring to  produce is a just apprehension of the value of forms in meditation and not the  imparting of any definite method. I seek to show the essential nature of proceeding  under law in this the most important means of bringing about union with the divine,  and of producing that at-one-ment between the higher and the lower that is the aim of  all evolution. I desire to leave in the minds of those who read these words a just  apprehension of the relationship between spirit and matter which is the basis of all  work of this nature. 
The method employed by the Logos in this the second solar system is definitely the  use of form for purposes of manifestation, as a medium of expression and as the  vehicle whereby the indwelling life may grow, expand, experience and find itself.  This is the case whether the form is an entire solar system, whether it is a human  being in his complexity, or whether it is a form built by that human being in his  endeavour to realise and know,—a form built for the very purpose of providing a 
vehicle whereby the consciousness may, by set stages, raise itself step by step to some  visualised point. This brings us to our first point: 
l—The use of Form in raising the consciousness.  
We have under this heading to consider three things: 
a—The Consciousness itself. 
b—The goal towards which it seeks to rise. 
c—The steps whereby it succeeds. 
Each unit of the human race is a part of the divine consciousness, and is that which is  conscious of, or is [Page 142] aware of something without itself,—something which  knows itself to be differentiated from the vehicle which encloses it or the forms which  environ it. 
At this particular stage in evolution the average man is simply conscious of  differentiation, or of being separated off from all other members of the human family,  thus forming in himself a unit among other units. He acknowledges this and  acknowledges the right of all other separated units so to consider themselves. He  adds to this a recognition that somewhere in the universe there exists a supreme  Consciousness, Whom he theoretically calls God, or Nature. Between this purely  selfish point of view (I use the term "selfish" in the scientific sense and not as a  belittling adjective) and the nebulous theory of God immanent there are to be found  numerous stages, at each of which occurs an expansion of consciousness, or an  enlargement of the point of view, that leads that self-recognising unit, step by step,  from self-recognition to the recognition of superior selves, to the fitting of himself to  be likewise recognised as a superior self, and eventually to the occult recognition of  his own superior Self. He comes to recognise his Higher Self or Ego as his true Self,  and from that stage passes on into that of the group consciousness. Here he realises  first his egoic group and then other egoic groups. 
This stage is succeeded by the recognition of the universal principle of Brotherhood;  it involves not just a theoretical recognition, but a merging of the consciousness into  that of the human consciousness, in its entirety; this is really that development of  consciousness which enables a man to realise not only his egoic group affiliations but  his place in the human Hierarchy on its own plane. He knows himself in fact as a part  of one of the great Heavenly Men. This expands later into an almost [Page 143]  inconceivably vast point of view—that of his place in the Grand Heavenly Man, as  represented by the Logos Himself. 
This is as far as we need go for our purpose, for this series of letters, aims not at the  development of cosmic consciousness. 
It will therefore be apparent to you that all these stages have to be taken  systematically and that each one has to be mastered step by step. It is necessary first  to grasp that the place where the expansion takes place, and the realisation has to be  felt, has to be finally in the thinking, waking consciousness. The Ego on its own  plane may be well aware of the unity of its consciousness with all other  consciousnesses, and be realising his group as one with himself, but until the man (in 
physical plane consciousness) has raised himself to that same plane and is likewise  aware of his group consciousness, and likewise regards himself as the higher Self  within the egoic group and not as a separated unit, it is of no more use than a  recognised theory is of use when not carried out in experience. 
The man has to experience these stages in his physical consciousness and to know  experimentally and not just theoretically that whereof I speak before he is deemed  ready to pass on into the succeeding stages. The whole matter resolves itself into the  expansion of the mind until it dominates the lower, and into the faculty of abstract  conception which results eventually in physical plane manifestation. It means making  your highest theories and ideals demonstrable facts and it is that blending of the  higher and the lower and the equipping of that lower until it provides a fitting  expression for the higher. It is here that the practice of meditation plays its part. The  true scientific meditation provides [Page 144] graded forms whereby the  consciousness is raised and the mind expanded until it embraces: 
l—Its family and friends. 
2—Its environing associates. 
3—Its affiliated groups. 
4—Its egoic group. 
5—Other egoic groups. 
6—That Man of the Heavens of which the egoic groups form a centre. 7—The Grand Heavenly Man. 
To effect this certain forms will be laid down later, that (working along the line of a  man's ray) will teach him in graded steps to do this. You will note that I have dealt  with the consciousness itself and the goal it aspires to and have thus dealt with our  first two points. This brings me to our last subsidiary heading, the steps whereby  attainment eventuates. 
Each man who enters upon occult development and who aspires toward the higher,  has passed the stage of the average man,—the man who regards himself from the  purely isolated standpoint and who works for what is good for himself. The aspirant  is aiming at something different; he seeks to merge himself with his higher Self and  with all that is entailed when we use that term. The stages beyond that, in all their  intricacies, are the secrets of Initiation and with them we have naught to do. 
Aspiration towards the Ego and the bringing in of that higher consciousness with the  subsequent development of group consciousness very directly concern all who will  read these letters. It is the next step ahead for those upon the Probationary Path. It is  not achieved by simply giving thirty minutes a day to certain set forms of meditation.  It involves an hour by hour attempt, [Page 145] all day long and every day, to keep  the consciousness as near to the high pitch attained in the morning meditation as  possible. It presumes a determination to consider oneself at all times as the Ego, and  not as a differential Personality. Later, as the Ego comes more and more into control,  it will involve also the ability to look upon oneself as part of a group, with no interests  and desires, no aims or wishes apart from the good of that group. It necessitates a  constant watchfulness every hour of the day to prevent the falling back into the lower  vibration. It entails a constant battle with the lower self that drags down; it is a  ceaseless fight to preserve the higher vibration. And—which is the point I am aiming 
to impress upon you—the aim should be the development of the habit of meditation  all the day long, and the living in the higher consciousness till that consciousness is so  stable that the lower mind, desire and the physical elementals, become so atrophied  and starved through lack of nourishment that the threefold lower nature becomes  simply the means whereby the Ego contacts the world for purposes of helping the  race. 
In so doing he is accomplishing something that is little realised by the average  student. He is building a form, a definite thoughtform that eventually provides a  vehicle whereby he steps out of the lower consciousness into the higher, a kind of  mayavirupa that acts as his intermediate channel. These forms are usually, though not  invariably, of two kinds:— 
The student builds a form daily, with care and love and attention, of his Master, to  him the embodiment of the ideal higher consciousness. He lays the outline of this  form in meditation and builds in the fabric in his daily life and thought. The form is  provided with all the virtues, scintillates with all the colours, and is vivified, [Page  146] first of all, by the love of the man for his Master, and later (when adequate for  the purpose) it is vitalised by the Master Himself. At a certain stage in development  this form provides the ground for the occult experience of entering into the higher  consciousness. The man recognises himself as a part of the Master's consciousness  and through that all embracing consciousness slips into the egoic group soul  consciously. This form provides the medium for that experience until such a time as  it can be dispensed with, and the man can at will transfer himself into his group, and later consciously dwell there permanently. This method is the one most largely used,  and is the path of love and devotion. 
In the second method the student pictures himself as the ideal man. He visualises  himself as the exponent of all the virtues, and he attempts in his daily life to make  himself what he visualises himself to be. This method is employed by the more  mental types, the intellectuals, and those whose ray is not so coloured by love, by  devotion or by harmony. It is not so common as the first. The mental thoughtform  thus built up serves as the mayavirupa as did the other and the man passes from these  forms into the higher consciousness. As you therefore see, in building these forms  certain steps will have to be taken and each type will build the form somewhat  differently. 
The first type will start with some beloved individual, and from that individual, will  rise through the various other individuals to the Master. 
The other type will start with meditation on the virtue most desired, add virtue to  virtue in the building of the form of the ideal self until all the virtues have been  attempted and the Ego is suddenly contacted. 
[Page 147]  
Tomorrow we will take up this same subject from a different angle and study the  difference between the occultist and the mystic. 
August 8, 1920.
