Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
A TREATISE ON COSMIC FIRE 
BY 
ALICE A. BAILEY 
COPYRIGHT 1951 © BY LUCIS TRUST 
COPYRIGHT RENEWED 1979 © BY LUCIS TRUST 
DEDICATED WITH GRATITUDE 
TO 
HELENA PETROVNA BLAVATSKY, 
THAT GREAT DISCIPLE WHO LIGHTED HER TORCH 
IN THE EAST AND BROUGHT THE LIGHT TO EUROPE AND AMERICA IN 1875. 
"To the God Who is in the FIRE and Who is in the waters; 
To the God Who has suffused Himself through all the world; 
To the God Who is in summer plants and in the lords of the forest; 
To that God be adoration, adoration." 
—Sh’vet Upanishad, II.17. 
INTRODUCTION 
The story of the many years of telepathic work by the Tibetan with Alice A. Bailey is revealed in her Unfinished Autobiography, published in 1951. This includes the circumstances of her first contact with  him, on the physical plane, which took place in California in November 1919. Thirty years' work was planned. When this had been accomplished, and within thirty days after that period, Mrs. Bailey  gained her release from the limitations of the physical vehicle. 
The Autobiography also contains certain statements by the Tibetan in regard to his work and some information as to the reasons why it was undertaken. In the early stages the work involved careful attention to the physical plane conditions which might best help to make the telepathic process more successful. But during the latter years the technique was so perfected and the etheric mechanism of A.A.B. so skilfully attuned and adjusted that the whole process was practically effortless, and the reality and practical usefulness of telepathic interplay was demonstrated to an unique degree. 
The spiritual truths dealt with involved in many cases the expression by the lower concrete mind (often  with the insuperable restrictions of the English language) of abstract ideas and hitherto quite unknown  concepts of spiritual realities. This unescapable limitation of truth has been frequently called to the attention of the readers of the books so produced but is all too often forgotten. Its constant remembrance will constitute in the years to come one of the chief factors in preventing the crystallisation of the teaching from producing yet one more dogmatic sectarian cult.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
The present volume, A Treatise on Cosmic Fire, first published in 1925, was the third book jointly produced and carries inherent evidence that it will stand as the major and most far-reaching portion of the thirty-year teachings, notwithstanding the profundity and usefulness of the volumes published in the series entitled A Treatise on the Seven Rays or of any other of the books. 
During the long course of the work the minds of the Tibetan and A.A.B. became so closely attuned that they were in effect—so far as much of the production of the teaching was concerned—a single joint projecting mechanism. Even to the end A.A.B. often spoke of her amazement at the glimpses she obtained through contact with the Tibetan's mind, of limitless vistas of spiritual truths which she could  not possibly have otherwise contacted, and often of a quality she could not possibly express. This experience was the basis of her often proclaimed but frequently little-understood assertion that all the teachings she was aiding in producing was in fact only the A B C of esoteric knowledge, and that in the future she would gladly abandon any pronoucement in the present teaching, when she found better and  more deeply esoteric teaching available. Clear and profound as the teaching actually is in the books published in her name, the truths imparted are so partial and subject to later revelation and expansion  that this fact, if constantly remembered, will give us a second much-needed safeguard against that quality of the concrete mind which constantly tends to produce sectarianism. 
At the very beginning of the joint effort and after careful consideration it was decided between the Tibetan (D.K.) and A.A.B. that she as the working disciple on the outer plane should shoulder as much  as possible of karmic responsibility on that plane, and that the teaching should go to the public over her signature. This involved the burden of leadership in the esoteric field and precipitated attack and  condemnation from persons and organisations whose positions and activities were more Piscean and  authoritarian. 
The entire platform upon which esoteric teaching stands before the public today has been liberated  from the limitations and follies of mystery, glamour, claim-making and impracticality, by the position taken by the Tibetan and A.A.B. The stand taken against dogmatic assertion has helped to establish a new era of mental freedom for the students of the progressively unfolding revelation of the Ageless Wisdom. 
The age-old method of arriving at truth by the process of accepting new authorities and comparing them with previously established doctrines, while of undoubted value in the training of the mind, is gradually being transcended. In its place is emerging in both the religious and philosophical worlds a new capacity to take a more scientific position. Spiritual teaching will be increasingly accepted as an  hypothesis to be proved less by scholasticism, historical foundation and authority, and more by the results of its effect upon the life lived and its practical usefulness in solving the problems of humanity. 
Heretofore, advanced esoteric teaching has almost invariably been obtainable only by the student’s acceptance of the authority of the teacher, varying degrees of personal obedience to that teacher and  pledges of secrecy. As the new Aquarian dispensation progresses these limitations will disappear. The personal relation of the disciple to the Master remains, but already discipleship training has been  attempted in Group formation. The record of one such experiment and attempt to use this new age method has been made available to the public in the book entitled Discipleship in the New Age, which gives the direct personal instructions by the Tibetan to a selected group. 
In A Treatise on Cosmic Fire the Tibetan has given us what H. P. Blavatsky prophesied he would give,
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
namely the psychological key to the Cosmic Creation. H.P.B. stated that in the 20th century a disciple would come who would give the psychological key to her own monumental work The Secret Doctrine on which treatise the Tibetan worked with her; and Alice A. Bailey worked in complete recognition of her own task in this sequence. 
FOSTER BAILEY 
Tunbridge Wells 
December 1950 
[Page xi] 
FOREWORD 
This "Treatise on Cosmic Fire'' has a fivefold purpose in view: 
First, to provide a compact and skeleton outline of a scheme of cosmology, philosophy, and psychology  which may perhaps be employed for a generation as a reference and a textbook, and may serve as a scaffolding upon which more detailed instruction may later be built, as the great tide of evolutionary teaching flows on. 
Secondly, to express that which is subjective in comprehensible terms, and to point out the next step  forward in the understanding of the true psychology. It is an elucidation of the relation existing between Spirit and Matter, which relation demonstrates as consciousness. It will be found that the Treatise deals primarily with the aspect of mind, with consciousness and with the higher psychology, and less with matter as we know of it on the physical plane. The danger involved in giving out information concerning the various energies of atomic matter is too great, and the race as yet too selfish  to be entrusted with these potencies. Man is already, through the able work of the scientists, discovering the needed knowledge with adequate rapidity. The emphasis in this book will be found to  be laid upon those forces which are responsible for the objective manifestation of a solar Logos and of man, and only in the first section will indication be given as to the nature of those energies which are strictly confined to the physical plane. 
Thirdly, to show the coherent development of all that is found within a solar system; to demonstrate that everything which exists evolves (from the lowest form of life at the densest point of concretion up  to the highest and most tenuous manifestation) and that all forms are but the expression of a stupendous and divine Existence. This expression is caused by the blending of two divine aspects through the influence of a third, and produces the manifestation which we call a form, starting it upon its evolutionary cycle in time and space. Thus is form brought to the point where it is an adequate medium for the demonstration of the nature of that which we call God. 
Fourthly, to give practical information anent those focal points of energy which are found in the etheric bodies of the solar Logos, the macrocosm, and of man, the microcosm. As the etheric substratum which is the true substance underlying every tangible form is understood, certain great revolutions will
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
be brought about in the domains of science, of medicine and of chemistry. The study of medicine, for instance, will eventually be taken up from a new angle, and its practice will be built upon a comprehension of the laws of radiation, of magnetic currents, and of the force centres found in men's bodies and their relationship to the force centres and currents of the solar system. 
Fifthly, to give some information, hitherto not exoterically imparted as to the place and work of those myriads of sentient lives who form the essence of objectivity; to indicate the nature of those Hierarchies of Existences who form out of their own substance all that is seen and known, and who are themselves Fire and the cause of all the heat, warmth, life and motion in the universe. In this way the action of Fire on Water, of Heat in Matter, whether macrocosmically or microcosmically considered, will be touched upon and some light thrown upon the Law of Cause and Effect (the Law of Karma) and  its significance in the solar system. 
To sum up the matter, the teaching in this book should tend to an expansion of conscionsness, and  should bring about a recognition of the adequacy, as a working basis, for both science and religion, of that interpretation of the processes of nature which has been formulated for us by the Master Minds of all time. It should tend to bring about a reaction in favor of a system of philosophy which will link  both Spirit and matter, and demonstrate the essential unity of the scientific and religious idea. The two  are at present somewhat divorced, and we are only just beginning to grope our intellectual way out of the depths of a materialistic interpretation. It must not be forgotten, however, that under the Law of Action and Reaction, the long period of materialistic thought has been a necessary one for humanity, because the mysticism of the Middle Ages has led us too far in the opposite direction. We are now tending to a more balanced view, and it is hoped that this treatise may form part of the process through  which equilibrium is attained. 
In studying this treatise the student is asked to bear in mind certain things: 
a. That in dealing with these subjects we are concerned with the essence of that which is objective, with the subjective side of manifestation, and with the consideration of force and of energy. It is well nigh impossible to reduce such concepts to concrete formulas and to express them in such a way that they can be easily apprehended by the average man. 
b. That as we use words and phrases and speak in terms of modern language the whole subject necessarily becomes limited and dwarfed, and much of the truth is thereby lost. 
c. That all that is in this treatise is offered in no dogmatic spirit but simply as a contribution to the mass of thought upon the subject of world origins and to the data already accumulated as to the nature of man. The best that man can offer as a solution of the world problem must perforce take a dual form and will demonstrate through a life of active service, tending to amelioration of environal conditions, and through a formulation of some cosmological scheme or plan which will seek to account as much as may be for conditions as they are seen to exist. Arguing as men do at present from the basis of the known and the demonstrated and leaving untouched and unaccounted for, those deep-seated causes which must be presumed to be producing the seen and known, all solutions as yet fail and will continue to fail in their objective. 
d. That all attempts to formulate in words that which must be felt and lived in order to be truly  comprehended must necessarily prove distressingly inadequate. All that can be said will be after all but the partial statements of the great veiled Truth, and must be offered to the reader and student as simply 
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
providing a working hypothesis, and a suggestive explanation. To the open-minded student and the man who keeps the recollection in his mind that the truth is progressively revealed, it will be apparent that the fullest expression of the truth possible at any one time will be seen later to be but a fragment of a whole, and later still be recognised to be only portions of a fact and thus in itself a distortion of the real. 
This treatise is put out in the hope that it may prove useful to all broad-minded seekers after truth and of value to all investigators into the subjective Source of all that which is tangibly objective. It aims to  provide a reasonably logical plan of systemic evolution and to indicate to man the part he must play as an atomic unit in a great and corporate Whole. This fragment of the Secret Doctrine, in the turning of the evolutionary wheel, goes out to the world making no claims as to its source, its infallibility or the correctness in detail of its statements. 
No book gains anything from dogmatic claims or declarations as to the authoritative value of its source of inspiration. It should stand or fall solely on the basis of its own intrinsic worth, on the value of the suggestions made, and its power to foster the spiritual life and the intellectual apprehension of the reader. If this treatise has within it anything of truth and of reality, it will inevitably and unfailingly do  its work, carry its message, and thus reach the hearts and minds of searchers everywhere. If it is of no  value, and has no basis in fact, it will disappear and die, and most rightly so. All that is asked from the student of this treatise is a sympathetic approach, a willingness to consider the views put forth and that honesty and sincerity of thought which will tend to the development of the intuition, of spiritual diagnosis, and a discrimination which will lead to a rejection of the false and an appreciation of the true. 
The words of the Buddha most appropriately have their place here, and make a fitting conclusion to these preliminary remarks: 
THE LORD BUDDHA HAS SAID 
that we must not believe in a thing said merely because it is said; nor traditions because they have been  handed down from antiquity; nor rumours, as such; nor writings by sages, because sages wrote them; nor fancies that we may suspect to have been inspired in us by a Deva (that is, in presumed spiritual inspiration); nor from inferences drawn from some haphazard assumption we may have made; nor because of what seems an analogical necessity; nor on the mere authority of our teachers or masters. But we are to believe when the writing, doctrine, or saying is corroborated by our own reason and  consciousness. ''For this," says he in concluding, "I taught you not to believe merely because you have heard, but when you believed of your consciousness, then to act accordingly and abundantly." —Secret Doctrine III. 401. 
May this be the attitude of every reader of this ''Treatise on Cosmic Fire.'' 
ALICE A. BAILEY. 
Note:—In the footnotes throughout this treatise ''The Secret Doctrine" by H. P. Blavatsky is designated by the initials S.D. The page references are to the ''Third Revised Edition.''
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
FIRE 
"What says the esoteric teaching with regard to Fire?" 
Fire is the most perfect and unadulterated reflection, in Heaven as on earth, of the One Flame. It is life and death, the origin and the end of every material thing. It is divine Substance." —Secret Doctrine I. 146. 
Our earth and man (are) the products of the Three Fires. 
—Secret Doctrine II. 258. 
Fire and flame destroy the body of an Arhat; their essence makes him immortal. —Secret Doctrine I. 35. 
THE THREE FIRES 
I. The Internal Fire or Fire by Friction. 
"There is heat internal and heat external in every atom, the breath of the Father (Spirit) and the breath (or heat) of the Mother (matter)." 
—Secret Doctrine I. 112. 
II. The Fire of Mind or Solar Fire. 
“The fire of knowledge burns up all action on the plane of illusion, therefore those who have acquired  it and are emancipated are called ‘Fires.’” 
—Secret Doctrine I.114. 
III. The Fire of Spirit or Electric Fire. 
"Lift up thy head, O Lanoo; dost thou see one, or countless lights above thee, burning in the dark midnight sky?'' 
"I sense one Flame, O Gurudeva; I see countless Undetached sparks shining in it." —Secret Doctrine I. 145. 
CONTENTS 
SECTION ONE. THE INTERNAL FIRES—FIRE BY FRICTION 
Introductory Remarks 
Division A. Of the Sheaths macrocosmic and micro cosmic 
Division B. The Personality Ray and the first fire 
Division C. Prana and the etheric body 
Division D. Kundalini and the spine 
Division E. Motion on the physical and astral planes 
1. In the Sheaths
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
2. In the Centres 
Division F. The Law of Economy 
SECTION TWO. THE FIRE OF MIND—SOLAR FIRE 
Introductory Questions 
Division A. The Nature of Manas or Mind 
Division B. Manas as a cosmic, systemic and human factor 
Division C. The Egoic Ray and solar fire 
Division B. Thought elementals and fire elementals 
Division E. Motion on the plane of mind 
Division F. The Law of Attraction 
SECTION THREE. THE FIRE OF SPIRIT—ELECTRIC FIRE 
Division A. Certain basic fundamentals 
Division B. The Nature of the seven cosmic paths 
Division C. Seven esoteric stanzas 
The above tabulation of the subjects dealt with in this treatise is of very real importance, for it forms the basis of that which we shall be considering. The total lack of a wider consciousness than the individual and the personal, acts as a bar to the true comprehension of things macrocosmic, but if the occult method is adhered to, if the Law of Correspondences is studied, and if we ever reason upward  from the microcosm to the greater Whole, then glimpses will be caught of vast realms of realisation and  vistas of spiritual unfoldment will open up before us, undreamt of hitherto. 
FULL PAGE TABULATIONS 
I. FIRE AND THE ASPECTS 
II. EVOLUTION IN THE UNIVERSE 
III. THE ASPECTS AND EVOLUTION 
IV. THE BUILDING ENTITIES 
V. AGNI-LORD OF FIRE 
VI. THE LIVES AND THEIR GOAL 
VII. ENERGIES 
INTRODUCTORY POSTULATES
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
The teaching which is given in this Treatise on Cosmic Fire might be formulated in the following  terms. These postulates are simply extensions of the three fundamentals to be found in the Proem in  the first volume of the Secret Doctrine by H. P. Blavatsky. 1 1 Students are recommended to study  them carefully; in this way their understanding of the Treatise will be greatly aided. 
I. There is one Boundless Immutable Principle; one Absolute Reality which, antecedes all manifested  conditioned Being. It is beyond the range and reach of any human thought or expression. 
The manifested Universe is contained within this Absolute Reality and is a conditioned symbol of it. In the totality of this manifested Universe, three aspects are to be conceived. 
1. The First Cosmic Logos, impersonal and unmanifested, the precursor of the Manifested. 2. The Second Cosmic Logos, Spirit-Matter, Life, the Spirit of the Universe. 
3. The Third Cosmic Logos, Cosmic Ideation, the Universal World-Soul. 
From these basic creative principles, in successive gradations there issue in ordered sequence the numberless Universes comprising countless Manifesting Stars and Solar Systems. 
Each Solar System is the manifestation of the energy and life of a great Cosmic Existence, Whom we call, for lack of a better term, a Solar Logos. 
This Solar Logos incarnates, or comes into manifestation, through the medium of a solar system. This solar system is the body, or form, of this cosmic Life, and is itself triple. 
This triple solar system can be described in terms of three aspects, or (as the Christian theology puts it) in terms of three Persons. 
ELECTRIC FIRE, or SPIRIT. 
1st Person--------------Father. Life. Will. Purpose. Positive energy. 
SOLAR FIRE, OR SOUL. 
2nd Person-------------Son. Consciousness. Love-Wisdom. Equilibrised energy. 
FIRE BY FRICTION, or Body, or Matter. 
3rd Person-------------Holy Spirit. Form. Active Intelligence. Negative energy. Each of these three is also triple in manifestation, making therefore 
a. The nine Potencies or Emanations. 
b. The nine Sephiroth. 
c. The nine Causes of Initiation. 
These, with the totality of manifestation or the Whole, produce the ten (10) of perfect manifestation of
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
the perfect MAN. 
These three aspects of the Whole are present in every form. 
a. The solar system is triple, manifesting through the three above mentioned. 
b. A human being is equally triple, manifesting as Spirit, Soul and Body, or Monad, Ego and  Personality. 
c. The atom of the scientist is also triple, being composed of a positive nucleus, the negative electrons, and the totality of the outer manifestation, the result of the relation of the other two. 
The three aspects of every form are inter-related and susceptible of intercourse, because 
a. Energy is in motion and circulates. 
b. All forms in the solar system form part of the Whole, and are not isolated units. c. This is the basis of brotherhood, of the communion of saints, and of astrology. 
These three aspects of God, the solar Logos, and the Central Energy or Force (for the terms are occultly  synonymous) demonstrate through seven centres of force,—three major centres and four minor. These seven centres of logoic Force are themselves so constituted that they form corporate Entities. They are known as 
a. The seven planetary Logoi. 
b. The seven Spirits before the Throne. 
c. The seven Rays. 
d. The seven Heavenly Men. 
The Seven Logoi embody seven types of differentiated force, and in this Treatise are known under the names of Lords of the Rays. The names of the Rays are 
Ray I------ Ray of Will or Power ---- 1st Aspect 
Ray II----- Ray of Love-Wisdom ---- 2nd Aspect 
Ray III---- Ray of Active Intelligence 3rd Aspect 
These are the major Rays. 
Ray IV --- Ray of Harmony, Beauty and Art. 
Ray V ---- Ray of Concrete Knowledge or Science. 
Ray V ---- Ray of Devotion or of Abstract Idealism. 
Ray VII -- Ray of Ceremonial Magic or Order. 
II. There is a basic law called the Law of Periodicity. 
1. This law governs all manifestation, whether it is the manifestation of a solar Logos through the medium of a solar system, or the manifestation of a human being through the medium of a form. This law controls likewise in all the kingdoms of nature. 
2. There are certain other laws in the system which are linked with this one; some of them are as follows: 
a. The Law of Economy......the law governing matter, the third aspect.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
b. The Law of Attraction...the law governing soul, the second aspect. 
c. The Law of Synthesis....the law governing spirit, or the first aspect. 
3. These three are cosmic laws. There are seven systemic laws, which govern the manifestation of our solar Logos: 
a. The Law of Vibration. 
b. The Law of Cohesion. 
c. The Law of Disintegration. 
d. The Law of Magnetic Control. 
e. The Law of Fixation. 
f. The Law of Love. 
g. The Law of Sacrifice and Death. 
4. Each of these Laws manifests primarily on one or other of the seven planes of the solar system. 
5. Each law sweeps periodically into power and each plane has its period of manifestation and its period of obscuration. 
6. Every manifested life has its three great cycles: 
Birth --------------- Life ------------Death. 
Appearance ------- growth---------disappearance. 
Involution--------- evolution------obscuration. 
Inert motion ------ activity --------rhythmic motion. 
Tamasic life ------ rajasic life-----sattvic life. 
7. Knowledge of the cycles involves knowledge of number, sound and colour. 8. Full knowledge of the mystery of the cycles is the possession only of the perfected adept. III. All souls are identical with the Oversoul. 
1. The Logos of the solar system is the Macrocosm. Man is the Microcosm. 
2. Soul is an aspect of every form of life from a Logos to an atom. 
3. This relationship between all souls and the Oversoul constitutes the basis for the scientific belief in Brotherhood. Brotherhood is a fact in nature, not an ideal. 
4. The Law of Correspondences will explain the details of this relationship. This Law of Correspondences or of Analogy is the interpretive law of the system, and explains God to man. 
5. Just as God is the Macrocosm for all the kingdoms in Nature, so man is the Macrocosm for all the sub-human kingdoms. 
6. The goal for the evolution of the atom is self-consciousness as exemplified in the human kingdom. The goal for the evolution of man is group consciousness, as exemplified by a planetary Logos. 2 2
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
The goal for the planetary Logos is God consciousness, as exemplified by the solar Logos. 
7. The solar Logos is the sum-total of all the states of consciousness within the solar system. 3Some Thoughts on the Gita, p. 54. 3 
STANZAS OF DYZAN 
STANZA I 
The Secret of the Fire lieth hid in the second letter of the Sacred Word. The mystery of life is concealed within the heart. When the lower point vibrates, when the sacred triangle glows, when the point, the middle center, and the apex, connect and circulate the Fire, when the threefold apex likewise burns, then the two triangles—the greater and the lesser—merge into one flame, which burneth up the whole. 
STANZA II 
"AUM," said the Mighty One, and sounded forth the Word. The sevenfold waves of matter resolved  themselves, and varied forms appeared. Each took its place, each in the sphere ordained. They waited  for the sacred flood to enter and to fill. 
The Builders responded to the sacred sound. In musical collaboration they attended to the work. They  built in many spheres, beginning with the third. Upon this plane their work commenced. They built the sheath of atma and strung it to its Primary. 
"AUM," said the Mighty One. "Let now the work proceed. Let the Builders of the air continue with the plan." 
The Deva-Lord and Builders upon the plane of air worked with the forms within that sphere which is reckoned mainly theirs. They wrought for union, each in his group assigned. The moulds grew fast beneath their hands. 
The sacred plane of juncture, the fourth great plane, became the sphere within the greater circle which marked the goal for man. 
"AUM," said the Mighty One, He breathed forth to the fifth, the plane which is the burning-ground, the meeting place for fire. This time a cosmic note is heard beneath the sound systemic. The fire within, the fire without, meet with the fire ascending. The guardians of the cosmic fire, the devas of fohatic heat, watched o'er the forms that formless stood, waiting a point in time. 
The builders of a lesser grade, devas who work with matter, wrought at the forms. They stood in
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
fourfold order. Upon the threefold levels in empty silence stood the forms. They vibrated, they  responded to the key, yet useless stood and uninhabited. 
"AUM," said the Mighty One, "let the waters too bring forth." The builders of the watery sphere, the denizens of moisture, produced the forms that move within the kingdom of Varuna. They grew and  multiplied. In constant flux they swayed. Each ebb of cosmic motion increased the endless flow. The ripple of the forms was seen. 
"AUM," said the Mighty One, "let the Builders deal with matter." The molten solidified. The solid forms were built. The crust cooled. The rocks congealed. The builders wrought in tumult to produce the forms of maya. When the rocky strata were completed the work stood in completion. The builders of the lowest grade announced the work was finished. 
Forth from the rocky strata emerged the covering next. The builders of the second agreed the work was done. The first and second on the upward way stood forth in fourfold form. The inner five was somewhat seen by those whose sight was keen. 
"AUM," said the Mighty One, and gathered in His Breath. The spark within the peopling third  impelled to further growth. The builders of the lowest forms, manipulating densest maya, merged their production with the forms built by the watery ones. Matter and water merged produced the third in time. Ascension thus progressed. The builders worked in union. They called the guardians of the fiery  zone. Matter and water mixed with fire, the inner spark within the form were blended all together. 
The Mighty One looked down. The forms met His approval. Forth came the cry for further light. Again He gathered in the sound. He drew to higher levels the feeble spark of light. Another tone was heard, the sound of cosmic fire, hid in the Sons of Manas. They called to their Primaries. The lower four, the higher three, and the cosmic fifth met at the great inbreathing. Another sheath was formed. 
STANZA III 
The great Wheel turned upon itself. The seven lesser wheels rushed into being. They revolve like their Mother, around, within and forward. All that existeth was. 
The wheels were diverse, and in unification, one. As evolved the great Wheel, the inner fire burst forth. It touched into life wheel the first. It circulated. A million fires rose up. The quality of matter densified, but form was not. The Sons of God arose, scanned the depth of Flame, took from its heart the sacred Stone of Fire, and proceeded to the next. 
In turning next the Great Wheel launched the second. Again the flame burst forth, took to its heart the Stone and proceeded in revolution. The Sons of God again arose, and sought within the flame. "The form sufficeth not," they said, "remove from without the fire." 
Faster revolved the greater Wheel, blue white emerged the flame. The Sons of God again came down  and a lesser wheel revolved. Seven times the revolution, and seven times great the heat. More solid  grew the formless mass, and deeper sank the Stone. To the heart of inmost fire the sacred Stone went down. This time the work was better done, and the product more perfected. At the seventh revolution, the third wheel rendered back the Stone. Triple the form, rosy the light, and sevenfold the eternal
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
principle. 
From out the greater Wheel, down from the vault of heaven, came into light the lesser wheel that counted as the fourth. The eternal Lhas looked down, and the Sons of God reached forth. Down to the inmost point of death They flung the sacred Stone. The plaudits of the Chohans rose. The work had  turned a point. From the pit of outer darkness, They gathered forth the Stone, translucent now and unalloyed, of colour rose and blue. 
The turning of the fifth wheel and its action on the Stone rendered it still more fit. Yellow the blending  tint, orange the inner fire, till yellow, rose and blue mingled their subtle tones. The four wheels with  the greater worked thus upon the Stone till all the Sons of God acclaimed, and said: "The work is done." 
STANZA IV 
In revolution fifth of the great Wheel the period set was reached. The lesser wheel, that responded to that fifth great turn, passed through the cycle and entered into peace. 
The lesser wheels come forth and likewise do their work. The great Wheel gathers back the emanating  sparks. The Five dealt with the work, the lesser two but wrought with detail. The Stone had gathered fire, lambent with flame it shone. The outer sheath met not the need till the sixth wheel and the seventh  had passed it through their fires. 
The Sons of God emerged from out their source, gazed on the sevenfold work, and stated it was good. The Stone was set alone. In dual revolution moved the greater Wheel. The fourth Lord of the greater Twelve handled the work of sevenfold fire. "It is not fit," He said, "merge thou this Stone within the wheel which started revolution." 
The lords of the greater seven plunged the Stone within the moving wheel. The lords of the greater fifth and sixth likewise plunged their Stone. 
Within the fire, deep at the inmost sphere, as whirled through space the greater Wheel, bearing the lesser seven, the two were fused. The fourth, the fifth, the sixth blended, merged and intermingled. 
The aeon closed, the work was done. The stars stood still. The eternal Ones cried to inmost heaven: "Display the work. Draw forth the Stones." And lo, the Stones were one. 
STANZA V 
The moment manvantaric, for which had waited all the Triads, the hour that marked the solemn point of juncture, arrived within the scope of time, and lo, the work was done. 
The hour for which the seven groups purushic, each vibrant to the sounding of the Word, seeking the adding of the power, had waited for millennia, passed in a flash of time, and lo, the work was done. 
The First Degree in mighty acclamation deeming the hour propitious, sounded the triple note in
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
threefold reverberation. The echo reached the goal. They three times sent it forth. Restless the sphere of blue felt the vibration and answering, roused herself and hastened to the call. 
The Second, with wise insistence, hearing the First sound forth, knowing the hour had likewise come, echoed the sound or note quadruple. This fourfold reverberation circled the gamut of the spheres. Again it was sent forth. Three times the note was sounded, pealing across the heavens. At the third  intoning came the answer to the call. Vibrant as a key attuned, the eternal Primary replied. The blue to  the dense one answered and responded to the need. 
Quivering the sphere heard the third take up the note, pealing it forth, a full-toned chord smote on the ears of the Watchers of the Flame. 
The Lords of Flame arose and prepared Themselves. It was decision's hour. The seven Lords of the seven spheres watched breathless the result. The great Lord of sphere the fourth awaited the oncoming. 
The lower was prepared. The upper was resigned. The great Five waited for the point of equidistant merging. The foundation note ascended. Deep answered unto deep. The fivefold chord awaited the response from Those Whose hour had come. 
Dark grew the space between the spheres. Radiant two balls became. The threefold thirty-five, finding  the distance just, flashed like a sheet of intermittent flame, and lo, the work was done. The great Five met the Three and Four. The point intermediate was achieved. The hour of sacrifice, the sacrifice of Flame, arrived, and for aeons hath endured. The timeless Ones entered into time. The Watchers began  Their task, and lo, the work proceeds. 
STANZA VI 
Within the cavern dark the fourfold one groped for expansion and for further light. No light above, and  all around the gloom enveloped. Pitchy the darkness that surrounded it. To the innermost centre of the heart, throbbing without the Warming Light, crept in the icy cold of uttermost darkness. 
Above the cavern dark shone all the light of day; yet the fourfold one saw it not, nor did the light pervade. 
The rending of the cavern precedes the light of day. Great, then, must be the shattering. No help is found within the cave, nor any hidden light. Around the fourfold one lieth the vault of stone; beneath  him menaceth the root of blackness, of utter denseness; beside him and above, naught but the same is seen. 
The threefold Watchers know and see. The fourfold is now ready; the work of denseness is completed; the vehicle prepared. 
Soundeth the trump of shattering. Blinding the power of the oncoming flame. The mystic earthquake rocks the cavern; the burning Flames disintegrate the maya, and lo, the work is done. 
Gone is the gloom and the blackness; rent is the cavern's roof. The light of life shines in; the warmth  inspires. The Lords on-looking see the work commence. The fourfold one becomes the seven. The
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
chant of those who flame rises to all creation. The moment of achievement is attained. Proceedeth the work anew. Creation moveth on its way, while waxeth the light within the cavern. 
STANZA VII 
Riseth the cave of beauty rare, of colour iridescent. Shineth the walls with azure tint, bathed in the light of rose. The blending shade of blue irradiates the whole and all is merged in gleaming. 
Within the cave of iridescent colour, within its arching circle, standeth the fivefold One demanding further light. He struggleth for expansion, he wrestleth towards the day. The Five demand the greater Sixth and Seventh. The surrounding beauty meeteth not the need. The inner warmth sufficeth but to feed the urge for FIRE. 
The Lords of Flame look on; they chant aloud: "The time is come, that time for which We wait. Let the Flame become the FIRE and let the light shine forth." 
The effort of the Flame within the crystal cave becometh ever greater. The cry goes forth for other aid  from other Flaming Souls. The response comes. 
The Lord of Flame, the Ancient One, the Mighty Lord of Fire, the Point of Blue within the hidden  diamond, the Youth of Timeless Aeons, assisteth in the work. The inner burning light and the outer waiting fire,—together with the ROD,—meet on the sphere of crystal, and lo, the work is done. The crystal rends and quivers. 
Seven times the work proceeds. Seven the efforts made. Seven the applications of the Rod, held by a Lord of Flame. Three are the lesser touches; four the divine assistance. At the final fourth the work is done and the whole cave disrupts. The lighted flame within spreads through the rending walls. It mounteth to its Source. Another fire is merged; another point of blue findeth its place within the diadem logoic. 
STANZA VIII 
The greater Three, each with their seven lesser wheels, in spiral evolution, rotate within the timeless Now, and move as one. The cosmic Lords from Their high place, view the past, control the Now, and  ponder on the Day be with us. 
The Lhas of the eternal Sound, the product of the time that was, surmount the sevenfold display. Within the Ring-pass-not the Word of Love sounds forth. 
The sevenfold Lords proceed with just vibration to carry out the work. They sound forth each a note of the deep logoic chord. Each to His greater Lord makes record due. In the solemn breathing forth the forms are built, the colour just apportioned, and the flame within reveals itself with ever growing light. 
Blue to the green is added and completion quick is seen. The vibration of the third is added to the one. Blue to the orange blends, and in their wise admixture is seen the stable scheme. To the yellow and the
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
red, to the purple and the ultimate is the vibration of the seventh adjusted as the Primary. 
Each of the seven Lords, within Their seven schemes, adjusted to the second karmic circle, merge Their migrating spheres and blend Their myriad atoms. 
The forms through which They work, the lesser million spheres, the cause of separation and the curse of the Asuras, shatter when sounds the Sacred Word within a point in time. 
The life logoic surges out. The streams of colour melt together. The forms are left behind, and Parabrahm stands complete. The Lord of the cosmic Third utters a Word unknown. The sevenfold lesser Word forms part of the vaster chord. 
The Now becomes the time that was. The aeon mergeth into space. The Word of Motion hath been  heard. The Word of Love succeedeth. The Past controlled the form. The Now evolves the life. The Day that is to be sounds forth the Word of Power. 
The form perfected and the life evolved hold the third secret of the greater Wheel. It is the hidden  mystery of living motion. The mystery, lost in the Now but known to the Lord of Cosmic Will. 
STANZA IX 
The thirty thousand million Watchers refused to heed the call. "We enter not the forms," they said, "until the seventh aeon." The twice thirty thousand million hearkened to the call and took the forms designed. 
The rebellious ones laughed within themselves, and sought pralayic peace until the seventh aeon. But the seven great Lords called to the greater Chohans, and with the eternal Lhas of the third cosmic heaven entered into debate. 
The dictum then went forth. The laggards in the highest sphere heard it echo through the scheme. "Not till the seventh aeon, but at the fourteenth seventh will the chance again come round. The first shall be the last and time be lost for aeons." 
The obedient Sons of Mind connected with the Sons of Heart, and evolution spiralled on its way. The Sons of Power stayed in their appointed place, though cosmic karma forced a handful to join the Sons of Heart. 
At the fourteenth seventh aeon, the Sons of Mind and Heart, absorbed by endless flame, will join the Sons of Will, in manvantaric manifestation. Three times the wheel will turn. 
At the centre stand the buddhas of activity, helped by the lords of love, and following their twofold  work will come the radiant lords of power. 
The buddhas of creation from out the past have come. The buddhas of love are gathering now. The buddhas of will at the final turn of the third major wheel will flash into being. The end will then be consummated.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
STANZA X 
The Fifth progresseth and from the remnants of the Fourth multiplied and reproduced. The waters arose. All sank and was submerged. The sacred remnant, in the place appointed, emerged at later date from out the zone of safety. 
The waters dissipated. The solid ground emerged in certain destined places. The Fifth o'er-ran the Sacred Land, and in their fivefold groups developed the lower Fifth. 
They passed from stage to stage. The watching Lords, recognising the rupas formed, gave a sign to the circulating Fourth and it speeded faster on its way. When the lesser Fifth had midway passed and all the lesser four were peopling the land, the Lords of Dark Intent arose. They said: "Not so shall go the force. The forms and rupas of the third and fourth, within the corresponding Fifth, approach too close the archetype. The work is far too good." 
They constructed other forms. They called for cosmic fire. The seven deep pits of hell belched forth  the animating shades. The incoming seventh reduced to order all the forms,—the white, the dark, the red, and shaded brown. 
The period of destruction extended far on either hand. The work was sadly marred. The Chohans of the highest plane gazed in silence on the work. The Asuras and the Chaitans, the Sons of Cosmic Evil, and the Rishis of the darkest constellations, gathered their lesser hosts, the darkest spawn of hell. They  darkened all the space. 
* * * * * 
From the coming of the heaven-sent One peace passed upon the earth. The planet staggered and  belched forth fire. Part rose. Part fell. The form was changed. Millions took other forms or ascended  to the appointed place of waiting. They tarried till the hour of progress should again sound forth for them. 
* * * * * 
The early Third produced the monsters, great beasts and evil forms. They prowled upon the surface of the sphere. 
The watery Fourth produced within the watery sphere, reptiles and spawn of evil fame, the product of their karma. The waters came and swept away the progenitors of the fluidic spawn. 
The separating Fifth built in the rupa sphere the concrete forms of thought. They cast them forth. They  peopled the lower four, and like a black and evil cloud shut out the light of day. The higher three were hid. 
* * * * * 
The war upon the planet had been waged. Both sides descended into hell. Then came the Conqueror of form. He drew on the Sacred Fire, and purified the rupa levels. The fire destroyed the lands in the
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
days of the lesser Sixth. 
When the Sixth appeared the land was changed. The surface of the globe circled through another cycle. Men of the higher Fifth mastered the lower three. The work was shifted to the plane whereon  the Pilgrim stood. The lesser triangle within the lower auric egg became the centre of cosmic dissonance. 
STANZA XI 
The wheel of life turns within the wheel of outer form. 
The matter of Fohat circulateth, and its fire hardeneth all the forms. The wheel that is not glimpsed  moveth in rapid revolution within the slower outer case, till it weareth out the form. 
The forty-nine fires burn at the inner centre. The thirty-five circulating fiery vortices extend along the circle of the periphery. Between the two passeth in ordered sequence the various coloured flames. 
The great Triangles in their just arrangement hold hid the secret of the wheel of life. The cosmic fire radiates as directed from the second sphere, controlled by the Ruler of the merging ray. The cohorts of the third encircling sphere in varied ranks mark out the lesser threes. 
The wheel of life still moves within the form. The devas of the fourth connect the thirty-five, and  blend them with the central forty-nine. Above they work, seeking to merge the whole. Upward they strive, who in their myriad forms revolve within the wheels of lesser magnitude. The whole is one, yet on the lower spheres only the forms appear. They seem in their divisions more than can be grasped or met. 
The many circulate. The forms are built, become too firm, are broken by the life, and circulate again. The few revolve, holding the many in the heat of motion. The one embraces all, and carries all from great activity into the heart of cosmic peace. 
STANZA XII 
The Blessed Ones hide Their threefold nature but reveal Their triple essence by means of the three great groups of atoms. Three are the atoms and threefold the radiation. 
The inner core of Fire hides itself and is known only through radiation and that which radiates. Only  after the blaze dies out and the heat is no longer felt can the fire be known. 
STANZA XIII 
Through the band of violet that encircleth the Heavens passeth the globe of purple dark. It passeth and  returneth not. It becometh enrapt in the blue. Three times the blue enfoldeth, and when the cycle is completed the purple fadeth and is merged into the rose, and the path again is traversed.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
Three the great colours in the cycle that counteth as the fourth, violet, blue and rose, with the basic purple in revolution. 
Four are the colours secondary in the cycle of discrimination in which the revolution taketh place. It is circled to the midmost point and somewhat passed. Yellow the band that cometh, orange the cloud that hideth, and green for vivification. Yet the time is not yet. 
Many the circling fires; many the revolving rounds, but only when the complementary colours recognise their source, and the whole adjusteth itself to the seven will be seen completion. Then will be seen each colour in adjustment right, and the cessation of revolution. 
SECTION ONE 
FIRE BY FRICTION 
THE FIRE OF MATTER 
INTRODUCTORY REMARKS 
I. Fire in the Macrocosm 
II. Fire in the Microcosm. 
III. Fire in manifestation. 
We purpose in these few introductory remarks to lay down the foundation for a 'Treatise on Cosmic Fire,' and to consider the subject of fire both macrocosmically and microcosmically, thus dealing with it from the standpoint of the solar system, and of a human being. This will necessitate some preliminary technicalities which may seem at first perusal to be somewhat abstruse and complicated but which, when meditated upon and studied, may eventually prove illuminating and of an elucidating  nature, and which also, when the mind has familiarised itself with some of the details, may come to be regarded as providing a logical hypothesis concerning the nature and origin of energy. We have elsewhere, in an earlier book, touched somewhat upon this matter, but we desire to recapitulate and in  so doing to enlarge, thus laying down a broad foundation upon which the subject matter can be built up, and providing a general outline which will serve to show the limits of our discussion. 
Let us, therefore, look at the subject macrocosmically and then trace the correspondence in the microcosm, or human being. 
I. FIRE IN THE MACROCOSM 
In its essential nature Fire is threefold, but when in manifestation it can be seen as a fivefold  demonstration, and be defined as follows: 
1. Fire by friction, or internal vitalising fire. These fires animate and vitalise the objective solar system. They are the sumtotal of logoic kundalini, when in full systemic activity.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
2. Solar Fire, or cosmic mental fire. This is that portion of the cosmic mental plane which goes to the animation of the mental body of the Logos. This fire may be regarded as the sumtotal of the sparks of mind, the fires of the mental bodies and the animating principle of the evolving units of the human race in the three worlds. 
3. Electric Fire, or the logoic Flame Divine. This flame is the distinguishing mark of our Logos, and it is that which differentiates Him from all other Logoi; it is His dominant characteristic, and the sign of His place in cosmic evolution. 
This threefold fire may be expressed in ray terms as follows: 
First, we have the animating fires of the solar system, which are the fires of the primordial ray of active intelligent matter; these constitute the energy of Brahma, the third aspect of the Logos. Next are to be found the fires of the divine Ray of Love-Wisdom, the ray of intelligent love, which constitutes the energy of the Vishnu aspect, the second aspect logoic. 4Pranava-Vada, pp. 72-74, 94-95. 4 Finally are to be found the fires of the cosmic mental plane, which are the fires of the cosmic ray of will. They  might be described as the rays of intelligent will and are the manifestation of the first aspect logoic, the Mahadeva aspect. 55 Therefore we have three cosmic rays manifesting: 
The Ray of intelligent activity. This is a ray of a very demonstrable glory, and of a higher point of development than the other two, being the product of an earlier mahakalpa, or a previous solar system.: 66 "One day out of this long life of Brahma is called Kalpa; and a Kalpa is that portion of time which intervenes between one conjunction of all the planets on the horizon of Lanka, at the first point of Aries, and a subsequent similar conjunction. A Kalpa embraces the reign of fourteen Manus, and  their sandhies (intervals); each Manu lying between two sandhies. Every Manu's rule contains seventy one Maha Yugas,—each Maha Yuga consists of four Yugas, viz., Krita, Treta, Dwapara, and Kali; and  the length of each of these four Yugas is respectively as the numbers, 4, 3, 2 and 1. The number of sidereal years embraced in the foregoing different periods are as follows: Mortal years 
360 days of mortals make a year------------------------------------------------1 
Krita Yuga contains --------------------------------------------------------------1,728,000 Treta Yuga contains------------------------------------------------------------- 1,296,000 Dwapara Yuga contains------------------------------------------------------ 864,000 Kali Yuga contains ------------------------------------------------------------ 432,000 The total of the said four Yugas constitute a 
Maha Yuga ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 4,320,000 Seventy-one of such Maha Yugas 
form the period of the reign of one Manu ------------------------------ 306,720,000 The reign of 14 Manus embraces the duration  
of 994 Maha Yugas, which is equal to------------------------------------ 4,294,080,000 Add Sandhis, i.e., intervals between the reign of each  
Manu, which amount to 6 Maha Yugas, equal to----------------------- 25,920,000 The total of these reigns and interregnums of 
14 Manus, is 1,000 Maha Yugas, which constitute 
a Kalpa, i.e., one day of Brahma, equal to-------------------------------- 4,320,000,000 As Brahma's night is of equal duration, one day 
and night of Brahma will contain-------------------------------------------8,640,000,000
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
360 of such days and nights make one year 
of Brahma, equal to --------------------------------------------------------- 3,110,400,000,000 100 of such years constitute the whole period 
of Brahma's age, i.e., Maha Kalpa------------------------------------------3,110,400,000,000 
That these figures are not fanciful, but are founded upon astronomical facts, has been demonstrated by  Mr. Davis, in an essay in the Asiatic Researches; and this receives further corroboration from the geological investigations and calculations made by Dr. Hunt, formerly President of the Anthropological Society, and also in some respects from the researches made by Professor Huxley. 
Great as the period of the Maha Kalpa seems to be, we are assured that thousands and thousands of millions of such Maha Kalpas have passed, and as many more are yet to come. (Vide Brahma Vaivarta and Bhavishyre Puranas; and Linga Purana, ch. 171, verse 107, &c.) and this in plain language means that the Time past is infinite and the Time to come is equally infinite. The Universe is formed, dissolved, and reproduced, in an indeterminate succession (Bhagavata-gita, VIII, 19)."—The Theosophist, Vol. VII, p. 115. 
6 It embodies the basic vibration of this solar system, and is its great internal fire, animating and vitalising the whole, and penetrating from the centre to the periphery. It is the cause of rotary motion, and therefore of the spheroidal form of all that exists. 
The Ray of intelligent love. This is the ray which embodies the highest vibration of which our solar Logos or Deity is capable in this present solar system. It is not yet vibrating adequately nor has it yet attained the peak of its activity. It is the basis of the cyclic spiral movement of the body logoic, and just as the Law of Economy is the law governing the internal fires of the system so the cosmic Law of Attraction and Repulsion is the basic law of this divine Ray. 
The Ray of intelligent will. Little as yet can be said about this ray. It is the ray of cosmic mind and in  its evolution parallels that of cosmic love, but as yet its vibration is slower and its development more retarded. This is definitely and deliberately so, and is due to the underlying purpose and choice of the solar Logos, Who seeks on His high level (just as do His reflections, the sons of men) to achieve a more rounded out development, and He therefore concentrates on the development of cosmic love in this greater cycle. 
This ray is governed by the Law of Synthesis, and is the basis of the systemic movement which may be best described as that of driving forward through space, or forward progression. Little can be predicated anent this ray and its expression. It controls the movements of the entire ring-pass-not in  connection with its cosmic centre. 77 
The tabulation on page 42 may make the above ideas somewhat clearer. 
These three expressions of the divine Life may be regarded as expressing the triple mode of manifestation. First, the objective or tangible universe; second, the subjective worlds or form; and thirdly, the spiritual aspect which is to be found at the heart of all. 88 1. The Primordial is the Ray and the direct emanation of the Sacred Four. S. D, I, 115, 116. 
The Sacred Four are: 
Unity 
a. Father --Mahadeva ---- 1st Logos ----- Will...Spirit.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
Duality 
b. Son -----Vishnu-------- 2nd Logos ---- Love-Wisdom. 
Trinity 
c. Mother -Brahma ------- 3rd Logos----- Intelligent activity. 
Sacred Four 
d. The united manifestation of the three—Macrocosm. 
2. The manifested Quaternary and the seven Builders proceed from the Mother.—S. D., I, 402. a. The seven Builders are the Manasaputras, the Mind-born sons of Brahma, the third aspect. S. D., III, 540. 
b. They come into manifestation to develop the second aspect. S. D., I., 108. 
c. Their method is objectivity. 
3. The re-awakened Energies sprang into space. 
a. They are the veiled synthesis--------------------S. D., I, 362 
b. They are the totality of manifestation ----------S. D., I, 470 
c. They are pre-cosmic------------------------------S. D., I, 152, 470 
8 The internal fires that animate and vitalise shew themselves in a twofold manner: 
TABULATION I. 
Fire Ray Aspect Expression Law Quality 
1. Internal --------Primordial ------- Intelligent---------Rotary motion ---------Economy --------- Fire by Activity. friction 
2. Of Mind -------Love -------------- Intelligent---------Spiral Cyclic-----------Attraction -------- Solar Fire. Love. 
3. Divine Flame -Will--------------- Intelligent---------Forward ----------------Synthesis --------- Electric Fire. Will. 
First as latent heat. This is the basis of rotary motion and the cause of the spheroidal coherent manifestation of all existence, from the logoic atom, the solar ring-pass-not, down to the minutest atom of the chemist or physicist. 
Second, as active heat. This results in the activity and the driving forward of material evolution. On the highest plane the combination of these three factors (active heat, latent heat and the primordial substance which they animate) is known as the 'sea of fire,' of which akasha is the first differentiation of pregenetic matter. Akasha, in manifestation, expresses itself as Fohat, or divine Energy, and Fohat on the different planes is known as aether, air, fire, water, electricity, ether, prana and similar terms. 99 Akasha. Definition S. D., II, 538 
It is the synthesis of ether-------------------------------S. D., I, 353, 354 
It is the essence of ether---------------------------------S. D., I, 366 
It is primordial ether-------------------------------------S. D., I, 585 
It is the third Logos in manifestation ------------------S. D., I, 377 
9, 1010 H. P. B., defines the Akasha in the following terms: S. D., II, 538. "Akasha the astral Light can be defined in a few words: It is the Universal soul, the Matrix of the Universe, the Mysterium Magicum from which all that exists is born by separation or differentiation. In the various occult books
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
it is called by different terms and it would be of value perhaps if we enumerate some of them here: There is one universal element with its differentiations. 
Homogeneous Differentiated. 
1. Undifferentiated 1. Astral Light. 
cosmic substance 2. Sea of fire. 
2. Primordial ether. 3. Electricity. 
3. Primordial electric entity. 4. Prakriti. 
4. Akasha. 5. Atomic matter. 
5. Super-astral light. 6. The serpent of evil. 
6. Fiery serpent. 7. Ether, with its four divisions, 
7. Mulaprakriti. air, fire, water, earth. " 
8. Pregenetic matter. 
10, 1111 Fohat is divine thought or energy (Shakti) as manifested on any plane of the cosmos. It is the interplay between Spirit and matter. The seven differentiations of Fohat are: 
1. The Plane of divine life ------------ Adi ---------------------Sea of fire. 
2. The Plane of monadic life---------- Anupadaka ------------Akasha. 
3. The Plane of Spirit------------------ Atma -------------------Aether. 
4. The Plane of the intuition ---------- Buddhi -----------------Air. 
5. The Plane of mind ------------------ Mental------------------Fire. 
6. The Plane of desire ----------------- Astral-------------------Astral Light. 
7. The Plane of density---------------- Physical----------------Ether. 
—S. D. I, 105, 134, 135, 136. 
11 It is the sumtotal of that which is active, animated, or vitalized, and of all that concerns itself with the adaptation of the form to the needs of the inner flame of life. 
It might here be useful to point out that magnetism is the effect of the divine ray in manifestation in the same sense that electricity is the manifested effect of the primordial ray of active intelligence. It would  be well to ponder on this for it holds hid a mystery. 
The fires of the mental plane also demonstrate in a twofold manner: 
First, as the Fire of Mind, the basis of all expression and in one peculiar occult sense the sumtotal of existence. It provides the relation between the life and the form, between spirit and matter, and is the basis of consciousness itself. 
Second, as the Elementals of Fire, or the sumtotal of the active expression of thought, showing itself through the medium of those entities who, in their very essence, are fire itself. 
These dualities of expression make the four necessary factors in the logoic quaternary,1212 or the lower nature of the Logos viewing His manifestation from one esoteric angle; exoterically, they are the sumtotal of the logoic quaternary, plus the logoic fifth principle, cosmic mind. 
The divine spark does not as yet manifest (as do the other two fires) as a duality, though what lies hidden in a later cycle, evolution alone will disclose. This third fire, along with the other two, make the necessary five of logoic evolutionary development and by its perfected merging with the other two fires as the evolutionary process proceeds is seen the goal of logoic attainment for this greater cycle or
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
period of this solar system. 
When the primordial ray of intelligent activity, the divine ray of intelligent love, and the third cosmic ray of intelligent will meet, blend, merge, and blaze forth, the Logos will take His fifth initiation, thus completing one of His cycles. When the rotary, the forward, and the spiral cyclic movements are working in perfect synthesis then the desired vibration will have been reached. When the three Laws of Economy, of Attraction, and of Synthesis work with perfect adjustment to each other, then nature will perfectly display the needed functioning, and the correct adaptation of the material form to the indwelling spirit, of matter to life, and of consciousness to its vehicle. 
II. FIRE IN THE MICROCOSM 
Let us briefly consider therefore the correspondence between the greater whole and the unit man and  then block out our subject in detail and consider the sections into which it will be wise to divide it. 
Fire in the Microcosm is likewise threefold in essence and fivefold in manifestation. 
1. There is Internal Vitalising Fire, which is the correspondence to fire by friction. This is the sumtotal of individual kundalini; it animates the corporeal frame and demonstrates also in the twofold manner: 
First, as latent heat which is the basis of life of the spheroidal cell, or atom, and of its rotary adjustment to all other cells. 
Second, as active heat or prana; this animates all, and is the driving force of the evolving form. It shows itself in the four ethers and in the gaseous state, and a correspondence is here found on the physical plane in connection with man to the Akasha and its fivefold manifestation on the plane of the solar system. 
This fire is the basic vibration of the little system in which the monad or human spirit is the logos, and  it holds the personality or lower material man in objective manifestation thus permitting the spiritual unit to contact the plane of densest matter. It has its correspondence in the ray of intelligent activity and is controlled by the Law of Economy in one of its subdivisions, the Law of Adaptation in Time. 
2. There is next the Fire or Spark of Mind which is the correspondence in man to solar fire. This constitutes the thinking self-conscious unit or the soul. This fire of mind is governed by the Law of Attraction as is its greater correspondence. Later we can enlarge on this. It is this spark of mind in  man, manifesting as spiral cyclic activity, which leads to expansion and to his eventual return to the centre of his system, the Monad—the origin and goal for the reincarnating Jiva or human being. As in  the macrocosm this fire also manifests in a twofold manner. 
It shows as that intelligent will which links the Monad or spirit with its lowest point of contact, the personality, functioning through a physical vehicle. 
It likewise demonstrates, as yet imperfectly, as the vitalising factor in the thought forms fabricated by  the thinker. As yet but few thought forms, comparatively, can be said to be constructed by the center of consciousness, the thinker, the Ego. Few people as yet are in such close touch with their higher self, or Ego, that they can build the matter of the mental plane into a form which can be truly said to be an expression of the thoughts, purpose or desire of their Ego, functioning through the physical brain.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
Most of the thought forms at present in circulation may be said to be aggregations of matter, built into form with the aid of kama-manas (or of desire faintly tinged with mind producing thus an admixture of astral and mental matter, mostly astral), and largely due to reflex elemental action. 
These dualities of expression are: 
1. Active fire or prana. 
Latent fire or bodily heat. 
2. Mental energy in the mental body. 
Purely mental thought forms, animated by self-engendered fire, or by the fifth principle, and therefore part of the sphere, or system of control, of the Monad. 
These form an esoteric quaternary which with the fifth factor, the divine spark of intelligent will, make the five of monadic manifestation—manifestation in this case connotating a purely subjective manifestation which is neither altogether spiritual nor altogether material. 
3. Finally there is the Monadic Flame Divine. This embodies the highest vibration of which the Monad  is capable, is governed by the Law of Synthesis, and is the cause of the forward progressive movement of the evolving Jiva. 
We now come, in due course, to the point of merging or to the end of manifestation, and to the consummation (viewing it monadically) of the great cycle or manvantara. What shall we therefore find? Just as in the macrocosm the blending of the three essential fires of the cosmos marked the point of logoic attainment, so, in the blending of the essential fires of the microcosm, do we arrive at the apotheosis of human attainment for this cycle. 
When the latent fire of the personality or lower self blends with the fire of mind, that of the higher self, and finally merges with the Divine Flame, then the man takes the fifth Initiation in this solar system, and has completed one of his greater cycles. 1313 These terms, Lower Self, Higher Self, Divine Self, are apt to be confusing until the student apprehends the various synonyms connected with them. The following table may be found helpful: 
Father ------------------Son --------------------- Mother 
Spirit -------------------Soul -------------------- Body 
Life ---------------------Consciousness -------- Form 
Monad------------------Ego--------------------- Personality 
Divine Self-------------Higher Self------------ Lower Self 
Spirit -------------------Individuality ---------- Personal Self 
The Point --------------The Triad-------------- The Quaternary 
Monad------------------Solar Angel ----------- Lunar Lords 
13 When the three blaze forth as one fire, liberation from matter, or from material form is achieved. Matter has been correctly adjusted to spirit, and finally the indwelling life slips forth out of its sheath  which forms now only a channel for liberation. 
III. FIRE IN MANIFESTATION. 
To continue our consideration of the fires which sustain the economy of the visible solar system, and of
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
the visible objective human being, which produce evolutionary development, and which are the bases of all objective efflorescence, it must be noted that they demonstrate as the sumtotal of the vital life of a solar system, of a planet, of the entire constitution of active functioning man upon the physical plane, and of the atom of substance. 
Speaking broadly we would say that the first fire deals entirely with: 
a. Activity of matter. 
b. The rotary motion of matter. 
c. The development of matter by the means of friction, under the law of Economy. H. P. B. touches on  this in the Secret Doctrine. 1414: See S. D., I, 169, 562, 567, 569; II, 258, 390, 547, 551, 552.14 
The second fire, that from the cosmic mental plane, deals with: 
a. The expression of the evolution of mind or manas. 
b. The vitality of the soul. 
c. The evolutionary expression of the soul as it shows forth in the form of that elusive something which  brings about the synthesis of matter. As the two merge by means of this active energising factor, that which is termed consciousness appears. 15Study of Consciousness Mrs. Besant says (page 37): "Consciousness is the one reality, in the fullest sense of that much-used phrase; it follows from this that any reality found anywhere is drawn from consciousness. Hence, everything which is thought, is. That consciousness in which everything is, everything literally, "possible" as well as "actual"—actual being  that which is thought of as existent by a separated consciousness in time and space, and possible all that which is not so being thought of at any period in time and any point in space—we call Absolute Consciousness. It is the All, the Eternal, the Infinite, the Changeless. Consciousness, thinking time and space, and of all forms as existing in them in succession and in places, is the Universal Consciousness, the One, called by the Hindu the Saguna Brahman—the Eternal with attributes—the Pratyag-Atma—the Inner Self; by the Parsi, Hormuzd; by the Mussulman, Allah. Consciousness dealing with a definite time, however long or short, with a definite space, however vast or restricted, is individual, that of a concrete Being, a Lord of many universes, or a universe or of any so-called portion  of a universe, his portion and to him therefore a universe—these terms varying as to extent with the power of the consciousness; so much of the universal thought as a separate consciousness can  completely think, i.e., on which he can impose his own reality, can think of as existing like himself, is his universe."15 As the merging proceeds and the fires become more and more synthesised, that totality of manifestation which we regard as a conscious existence becomes ever more perfected. d. The operation of this fire under the Law of Attraction. 
e. The subsequent result in the spiral-cyclic movement which we call, within the system, solar evolution, but which (from the standpoint of a cosmos) is the approximation of our system to its central point. This must be considered from the standpoint of time. 16 of absolute consciousness, may again be rotary.16 
The third fire deals with: 
a. The evolution of spirit. 
Practically nothing can at this stage be communicated anent this evolution. The development of spirit can be only expressed as yet in terms of the evolution of matter, and only through the adequacy of the vehicle, and through the suitability of the sheath, the body or form, can the point of spiritual development reached in any way be appraised. A word of warning should here be interpolated:—
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
Just as it is not possible upon the physical plane for the physical vehicle fully to express the total point of development of the Ego or higher self, so it is not possible even for the Ego fully to sense and  express the quality of spirit. Hence the utter impossibility for human consciousness justly to appraise the life of the spirit or Monad. 
b. The working of the flame divine under the Law of Synthesis—a generic term which will be seen  eventually to include the other two laws as subdivisions. 
c. The subsequent result of forward progressive motion—a motion which is rotary, cyclic and  progressive. 
The whole matter dealt with in this Treatise concerns the subjective essence of the solar system, not primarily either the objective or spiritual aspect. It concerns the Entities who indwell the form, who  demonstrate as animating factors through the medium of matter, and primarily through etheric matter; who are evolving a second faculty, the fire of mind, and who are essentially themselves points of fire, cast off through cosmic friction, produced by the turning of the cosmic wheel, swept into temporary  limited manifestation and due eventually to return to their central cosmic centre. They will return plus the results of evolutionary growth, and through assimilation they will have intensified their fundamental nature, and be spiritual fire plus the fire manasic. 
The internal fire of matter is called in the Secret Doctrine "Fire by Friction." It is an effect and not a cause. It is produced by the two fires of spirit and of mind (electric and solar fire) contacting each  other through the medium of matter. This energy demonstrates in matter itself as the internal fires of the sun, and of the planets and finds a reflection in the internal fires of man. Man is the Flame Divine and the fire of Mind brought into contact through the medium of substance or form. When evolution ends, the fire of matter is not cognisable. It persists only when the other two fires are associated, and it does not persist apart from substance itself. 
Let us now briefly recognise certain facts regarding fire in matter and let us take them in order, leaving  time to elucidate their significance. First we might say that the internal fire being both latent and  active, shows itself as the synthesis of the acknowledged fires of the system, and demonstrates, for instance, as solar radiation and inner planetary combustion. This subject has been somewhat covered  by science, and is hidden in the mystery of physical plane electricity, which is an expression of the active internal fires of the system and of the planet just as inner combustion is an expression of the latent internal fires. These latter fires are to be found in the interior of each globe, and are the basis of all objective physical life. 
Secondly, we might note that the internal fires are the basis of life in the lower three kingdoms of nature, and in the fourth or human kingdom in connection with the two lower vehicles. The Fire of Mind, when blended with the internal fires, is the basis of life in the fourth kingdom, and united they  control (partially now and later entirely) the lower threefold man or the personality; this control lasts up  to the time of the first Initiation. 
The fire of Spirit finally, when blended with the two other fires (which blending commences in man at the first initiation), forms a basis of spiritual life or existence. As evolution proceeds in the fifth or spiritual kingdom, these three fires blaze forth simultaneously, producing perfected consciousness. This blaze results in the final purification of matter and its consequent adequacy; at the close of manifestation it brings about eventually the destruction of the form and its dissolution, and the termination of existence as understood on the lower planes. In terms of Buddhistic theology it produces annihilation; this involves, not loss of identity, but the cessation of objectivity and the escape
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
of Spirit, plus mind, to its cosmic centre. It has its analogy in the initiation at which the adept stands free from the limitations of matter in the three worlds. 
The internal fires of the system, of the planet, and of man are threefold: 
1. Interior fire at the centre of the sphere, those inner furnaces which produce warmth. This is latent fire. 
2. Radiatory fire. This type of fire might be expressed in terms of physical plane electricity, of light rays, and of etheric energy. This is active fire. 
3. Essential fire, or the fire elementals who are themselves the essence of fire. They are mainly divided  into two groups: 
a. Fire devas or evolutionary entities. 
b. Fire elementals or involutionary entities. 
Later we will elaborate on this when we consider the Fire of Mind and deal with the nature of the thought elementals. All these elementals and devas are under the control of the fire Lord, Agni. When  considering Him and His kingdom the subject can be taken up at greater length. 
We might here point out, however, that our first two statements concerning the internal fires, express the effect that the fire entities have upon their environment. Heat and radiation are other terms which  might be applied in this sense. Each of these effects produces a different class of phenomena. Latent 
fire causes the active growth of that in which it is embedded and causes that upward pushing which  brings into manifestation all that is found in the kingdoms of nature. Radiatory fire causes the continued growth of that which has progressed, under the influence of latent fire, to a point receptive of the radiatory. Let us tabulate it thus: 
Systemic or Macrocosmic: The solar Logos or The Grand Man of the Heavens. 
Latent or interior fire produces the internal heat which makes the solar system productive of all forms of life. It is the inherent warmth that causes all fertilisation, whether human, animal, or vegetable. 
Active or radiatory fire retains in life and causes the evolution of all that has evolved into objectivity by  means of latent fire. 
Planetary, or the Heavenly Men: 
What is laid down anent the system, as a whole, can be predicated of all planets which in their nature reflect the Sun, their elder brother. 
Human, or the Microcosmic Man: 
Human latent fire, the heat interior of the human frame causes production of other forms of life, such  as— 
1. The physical body cells. 
2. Organisms nourished by the latent heat.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
3. The reproduction of itself in other human forms, the basis of the sex function. 
Human radiatory, or active fire, is a factor as yet but little comprehended; it relates to the health aura and to that radiation from the etheric which makes a man a healer, and able to transmit active heat. 
It is necessary to differentiate between this radiation from the etheric, which is a radiation of prana, and  magnetism, which is an emanation from a subtler body (usually the astral), and has to do with the manifestation of the Divine Flame within the material sheaths. The Divine Flame is formed on the second plane, the monadic, and magnetism (which is a method of demonstrating radiatory fire) is therefore felt paramountly on the fourth and sixth planes, or through the buddhic and astral vehicles. These are, as we know, closely allied to the second plane. This distinction is of importance and should  be carefully recognised. 
Having, therefore, made the above statements, we can proceed to take up somewhat in greater detail the interior fires of the systems, microcosmic and macrocosmic. 
DIVISION A - THE INTERNAL FIRES OF THE SHEATHS. 
I. The three channels. 
II. Fire elementals and devas. 
I. THE THREE CHANNELS FOR THE FIRE 
From the very use of the term "sheath" it will be noted that we are considering those fires which  manifest through the medium of those externalities, of those veils of substance which hide and conceal the inner Reality. We shall not here take up the subject of the sheaths on the higher planes, but simply  deal with the fires that animate the three lower vehicles,—the physical body in its two divisions (etheric and dense), the emotional or astral body, and the mental sheath. It is frequently overlooked by  the casual student that both the astral and the mental bodies are material, and just as material in their own way, as is the dense physical body, and also that the substance of which they are composed is animated by a triple fire, as is the physical. 
In the physical body we have the fires of the lower nature (the animal plane) centralised at the base of the spine. They are situated at a spot which stands in relation to the physical body as the physical sun  to the solar system. This central point of heat radiates in all directions, using the spinal column as its main artery, but working in close connection with certain central ganglia, wherever located, and having  a special association with the spleen. 
[CHART I — EVOLUTION OF MATTER] 
In the etheric body, which is an exact replica of its denser counterpart, we have the organ of active or radiatory fire, and, as is well known, the vehicle of prana. Its function is to store up the rays of radiatory light and heat which are secured from the sun, and to transmit them, via the spleen, to all parts
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
of the physical body. Hence in the future it will come to be recognised that the spine and the spleen are of the utmost importance to the physical well-being of man, and that when the spinal column is duly  adjusted and aligned, and when the spleen is freed from congestion and in a healthy condition, there will be little trouble in the dense physical body. When the physical furnace burns brightly and when  the fuel of the body (pranic rays) is adequately assimilated, the human frame will function as desired. 
The subject of the blending of these two fires, which is complete in a normal and healthy person, should engross the attention of the modern physician. He will then concern himself with the removal of nerve congestion or material congestion, so as to leave a free channel for the inner warmth. This blending, which is now a natural and usual growth in every human being, was one of the signs of attainment or of initiation in an earlier solar system. Just as initiation and liberation are marked in this solar system by the blending of the fires of the body, of the mind and of the Spirit, so in an earlier cycle attainment was marked by the blending of the latent fires of matter with the radiatory or active fires, and then their union with the fires of mind. In the earlier period the effects in manifestation of the divine Flame were so remote and deeply hidden as to be scarcely recognisable, though dimly there. Its correspondence can be seen in the animal kingdom, in which instinct holds the intuition in latency, and the Spirit dimly overshadows. Yet all is part of a divine whole. 
The subject of the radiatory heat of the macrocosmic and microcosmic systems will be dealt with in detail in a later subdivision. Here we will only deal with the latent interior fire of the 
a. Sun. 
b. Planet. 
c. Man. 
d. Atom. 
We must remember that in both the astral and the mental sheaths there exist the counterparts of the centres as found in the physical body. These centres concern matter and its evolution. One fundamental statement can be laid down anent the internal fires of all these four (sun, planet, man, and  atom): 
There exists in the Sun, in the planet, in man, and in the atom, a central point of heat, or ((if I might use so limiting and inappropriate a term) a central cavern of fire, or nucleus of heat, and this central nucleus reaches the bounds of its sphere of influence, its ring-pass-not by means of a threefold  channel. 1717: "The divine essence that, pervading the entire universe of millions of solar systems, is caught up by our sun and passed out in a manifested form to the utmost boundaries of our solar system, so that this manifested essence may be the basic soil of the growth, preservation and destruction of our worlds, that divine essence is simple Nadam of our yogic philosophy and that Nadam or OM subsequently manifests itself as seven streams. The unmanifested is manifested by or borne by the subsequent ramifications. These streams are the seven vowels or seven notes. These seven vowels and  notes must have special correlations with the seven vedic metres, since in the Vishnu Purana, Parasara describes the vedic metres as the coursers of the solar essence."—Some Thoughts on the Gita, p. 74.17 
a. The Sun. Within the sun, right at its very heart, is a sea of fire or heat, but not a sea of flame. Herein  may lie a distinction that perhaps will convey no meaning to some. It is the centre of the sphere, and  the point of fiercest internal burning, but has little relation to the flames or burning gases (whatever terms you care to use) that are generally understood to exist whenever the sun is considered. It is the point of fiercest incandescence, and the objective sphere of fire is but the manifestation of that internal
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
combustion. This central heat radiates its warmth to all parts of the system by means of a triple channel, or through its "Rays of Approach" which in their totality express to us the idea of "the heat of the sun." 
1. The akasha, itself vitalised matter, or substance animated by latent heat. 
2. Electricity, substance of one polarity, and energised by one of the three aspects logoic. To express it more occultly, substance showing forth the quality of the cosmic Lord Whose energy it is. 3. Light Rays of pranic aspect, some of which are being now recognised by the modern scientist. They  are but aspects of the latent heat of the sun as it approaches the Earth by a particular line of least resistance. 
When the term "channel or ray of approach" is used, it means approach from the centre of solar radiation to the periphery. What is encountered during that approach—such as planetary bodies, for instance—will be affected by the akashic current, the electrical current, or the pranic current in some way, but all of these currents are only the internal fires of the system when viewed from some other point in universal, though not solar, space. It is, therefore, obvious that this matter of fire is as complex  as that of the rays. The internal fires of the solar system become external and radiatory when  considered from the standpoint of a planet, while the internal fires of the planet will affect a human being as radiation in exactly the same way as the pranic emanations of his etheric body affect another physical body as radiatory. The point to be grasped in all these aspects is that one and all have to do with matter or substance, and not with mind or Spirit. 
b. The Planet. Deep in the heart of the planet—such a planet as the Earth, for instance—are the internal fires that occupy the central sphere, or the caverns which—filled with incandescent burning— make life upon the globe possible at all. The internal fires of the moon are practically burnt out, and, therefore, she does not shine save through reflection, having no inner fire to blend and merge with light external. These inner fires of the earth can be seen functioning, as in the sun, through three main channels: 
1. Productive substance, or the matter of the planet vitalised by heat. This heat and matter together act as the mother of all that germinates, and as the protector of all that dwells therein and thereon. This corresponds to the akasha, the active vitalised matter of the solar system, that nourishes all as does a mother. 
2. Electrical fluid, a fluid which is latent in the planet though as yet but little recognized. It is perhaps better expressed by the term "animal magnetism." It is the distinctive quality of the atmosphere of a planet, or its electrical ring-pass-not. It is the opposite pole to the solar electrical fluid, and the contact of the two and their correct manipulation is the aim—perhaps unrealised—-of all scientific endeavor at this time. 
3. That emanation of the planet which we might term Planetary Prana. It is that which is referred to when one speaks of the health-giving qualities of Mother Nature, and which is back of the cry of the modern physician, when he wisely says "Back to the Earth." It is the fluidic emanation of this prana which acts upon the physical body, though in this case not via the etheric body. It is absorbed through  
the skin purely and the pores are its line of least resistance. 
c. The Man. At the base of the spine lie hid the fires of the human system, or the internal fires of the Microcosm. The centre is located there, and from it the radiations go forth along the three channels, recognisable in the spine.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
1. Bodily warmth, the channel along which the heat radiates and which finds the goal of its attention to  be the heating of the corporeal frame. This vitalisation of the dense matter of the body finds its correspondence in the systemic akasha, and in planetary productive substance. 
2. Nervous response. This is the vitalising tenuous fluid which applies itself to the stimulation of the nervous centres, and which creates electrical response to contact between the nerves and the brain. It should now be more closely studied. It corresponds to systemic electricity, and to planetary electricity. 3. Pranic emanation. The emanation, via the etheric body, which corresponds in man to solar prana and to planetary prana. This demonstrates principally in the health aura and has naught to do with magnetic qualities, as generally interpreted when considering a personality, or man as a unit. I make this repetition as it is very necessary that no mental confusion exists between that magnetism which is a spiritual emanation and that which is purely animal. 
It might be wise here to point out that this triple manifestation of fire demonstrates in the astral and mental bodies likewise, having to do with the substance of those bodies. We might express this fire in  its triple manifestation as the sumtotal of the essential fire, or life activity of the third Logos. It should  be carefully borne in mind that the manifestation of the work of the three Logoi is the expression of the mind of some cosmic Entity. In the same way, the seven planetary Entities, the seven Heavenly Men, are seven Logoi (likewise cosmic Beings) Who in Their totality form the Body of the threefold Logos. We have, therefore: 
1. The undifferentiated Logos—a cosmic Entity. 
2. The Logos, threefold in manifestation: 
a. The cosmic Lord of Will Power. 
b. The cosmic Lord of Love and Wisdom. 
c. The cosmic Lord of Active Intelligence. 
3. The triple Logos, sevenfold in manifestation., i.e. The seven planetary Logoi. 18Esoteric Writings: "As a general rule, whenever seven entities are mentioned in the ancient occult science of India in any  connection whatsoever, you must suppose that those seven entities came into existence from three 
primary entities and that these three entities again are evolved out of a single entity or monad. To take a familiar example, the seven coloured rays in the solar ray are evolved out of three primary coloured rays; and the three primary colours co-exist with the four secondary colours in the solar ray. Similarly  the three primary entities which brought man into existence co-exist in him with the four secondary entities which arose from different combinations of the three primary entities." In Christian terminology these are the three Persons of the Trinity, and the seven Spirits which are before the Throne. Compare "Our God is a consuming fire." Heb: 12.29.18, 19Esoteric Buddhism, and  after having set the evolutionary current in motion, retired to the spiritual plane congenial to its own  nature, and has been watching since over the interests of humanity, and now and then appearing in  connection with a human individuality for the good of mankind. Or you may look upon the Logos represented by Krishna as one belonging to the same class as the Logos which so appeared. In speaking of himself Krishna says, (chap. x, verse 6): 
"The seven great Rishis, the four preceding Manus, partaking of my nature were born from my mind: from them sprang, was (born) the human race and the world." 
He speaks of the sapta Rishis and of the Manus as his manasaputras, or mind-born sons, which they  would be if he was the so-called Prajapati, who appeared on this planet and commenced the work of evolution."--The Theosophist, Vol. VIII, p. 443.19, 2020 The following tabulation should be borne in  mind: 
Seven branch races make ------------- one subrace 
Seven subraces make ------------------ one rootrace
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
Seven rootraces make ----------------- one world period 
Seven world periods make------------ one round 
Seven rounds make -------------------- one chain period 
Seven chain periods make ------------ one planetary scheme 
Ten planetary schemes make --------- one solar system 
20 
Each of these cosmic Entities is, in His essential essence, Fire; each manifests as fire in a threefold manner. In point of time the cosmic Lord of active Intelligence, considered from the standpoint of cosmic evolution, is more evolved than His two Brothers. He is the life of matter, its latent internal Fire. His is the fire essence that lies at the heart of the Sun, of the planet, and of man's material forms. 
He is the sumtotal of the Past. 
The Lord of Cosmic Love now seeks union with His Brother, and, in point of time, embodies all the Present. He is the sumtotal of all that is embodied; He is conscious Existence. He is the Son divine and His life and nature evolve through every existent form. The Lord of Cosmic Will holds hid the 
future within His plans and consciousness. They are all three the Sons of one Father, all three the aspects of the One God, all three are Spirit, all three are Soul, and all three are Rays emanating from one cosmic centre. All three are substance, but in the past one Lord was the elder Son, in the present another Lord comes to the fore, and in the future still another. But this is so only in Time. From the standpoint of the Eternal Now, none is greater nor less than another, for the last shall be first, and the first last. Out of manifestation time is not, and freed from objectivity states of consciousness are not. 
The fire of Spirit is the essential fire of the first Lord of Will plus the fire of the second Logos of Love. These two cosmic Entities blend, merge, and demonstrate as Soul, utilising for purposes of manifestation the aid of the third Logos. The three fires blend and merge. In this fourth round and on this fourth globe of our planetary scheme, the fires of the third Logos of intelligent matter are fusing  somewhat with the fires of cosmic mind, showing as will or power, and animating the Thinker on all planes. The object of Their co-operation is the perfected manifestation of the cosmic Lord of Love. This should be pondered upon for it reveals a mystery. 
The blending of the three fires, the merging of the three Rays, and the co-operation of the three Logoi have in view (at this time and within this solar system) the development of the Essence of the cosmic Lord of Love, the second Person in the logoic trinity. Earlier it was not so, later it will not be, but now it is. When viewed from the cosmic mental plane these Three constitute the PERSONALITY OF THE LOGOS, and are seen functioning as one. Hence the secret (well recognised as fact, though not understood) of the excessive heat, occultly expressed, of the astral or central body of the triple personality. It animates and controls the physical body, and its desires hold sway in the majority of cases; it demonstrates in time and space the correspondence of the temporary union of spirit and matter, the fires of cosmic love and the fires of matter blended. A similar analogy is found in the heat apparent in this second solar system. 
d. The Atom. The inner fires of the atom can likewise be seen functioning along similar lines, their demonstration being already somewhat recognised by science. This being so there exists no necessity  for further elaboration.21Pranava Vada, p. 94.21 
II. FIRE ELEMENTALS AND DEVAS
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
We might now briefly consider the subject of the fire elementals and devas, and then deal with the relation of the Personality Ray to this internal fire of the system in its threefold manifestation. 
Certain facts are known in connection with the fire spirits (if so they may be termed). The fundamental fact that should here be emphasised is that AGNI, the Lord of Fire, rules over all the fire elementals and devas on the three planes of human evolution, the physical, the astral, and the mental, and rules over them not only on this planet, called the Earth, but on the three planes in all parts of the system. He is one of the seven Brothers (to use an expression familiar to students of the Secret Doctrine) Who each  embody one of the seven principles, or Who are in Themselves the seven centres in the body of the cosmic Lord of Fire, called by H. P. B. "Fohat." He is that active fiery Intelligence, Who is the basis of the internal fires of the solar system. On each plane one of these Brothers holds sway, and the three elder Brothers (for always the three will be seen, and later the seven, who eventually merge into the primary three) rule on the first, third and the fifth planes, or on the plane of adi, of atma 22 Atma means as you all know the self or the ego or an individualised centre of consciousness around which all worldly experiences in their dual aspect of subjective and objective cluster and arrange themselves. It is as it were one of the foci from which emerge rays of light to illumine the cosmic waters and in which  also converge the rays sent back by those waters. In Theosophical writings, it is called the selfconscious individuality or the Higher Manas. From this point of view, you will see that the Higher Manas is the most important principle or the central pivot of the human constitution or the true soul. It is the thread which ought to be caught hold of by one who wants to know the truth and lift himself out of this conditioned existence. To this it may be objected that Atma represents the seventh principle of the theosophical septenary and that the Manas is far lower in the scale. But the plain answer is that the seventh principle is the ultimate state attainable by the self after crossing the ocean of conditioned existence or samsara."—Some Thoughts on the Gita, p. 26.22 and of manas. It is urgent that we here remember that They are fire viewed in its third aspect, the fire of matter. In Their totality these seven  Lords form the essence of the cosmic Lord, called in the occult books, Fohat. 2323 Fohat, or electricity, is an Entity. 
He is the primordial electric Entity ----------- S. D., I, 105. 
He is -------------- Will ------------------------ S. D., I, 136. 
He is -------------- Love-Wisdom ------------ S. D., I, 100,144,155. 
He is -------------- Active Intelligence ------- S. D., I, 136. 
Therefore He is God---------------------------- S. D., I, 167. 
He is the sumtotal of the energy of the seven Spirits, Who are the sumtotal of the Logos.—S. D., I, 169. 23 
This is so in the same sense as the seven Chohans, 24Chohan (Tibetan). A Lord or Master. A high Adept. An initiate who has taken more Initiations than the five major Initiations which make man a "Master of the Wisdom."24 with Their affiliated groups of pupils, form the essence or centres in the body of one of the Heavenly Men, one of the planetary Logoi. These seven again in Their turn form the essence of the Logos. 
Each of the seven Lords of Fire 25The seven Brothers. See S. D., I, 105. These seven are the seven  differentiations of primordial electric energy. 
Plane. As used in occultism, the term denotes the range or extent of some state of consciousness or of the perceptive power of a particular set of senses or the action or a particular force, or the state of matter corresponding to any of the above.25 are differentiated into numerous groups of fire entities, from the Deva-Lords of a plane down to the little salamanders of the internal furnaces. We are not
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
dealing with the fiery essences of the higher planes at this stage in our discussion. We will only  enumerate somewhat briefly some of the better known groups, as contacted in the three worlds. 
1. Physical Plane. 
Salamanders, those little fire elementals who can be seen dancing in every flame, tending the fires of the hearth and the home, and of the factory. They are of the same group as the fire spirits who can be contacted deep in the fiery bowels of the planet. 
Fire spirits, latent in all focal points of heat, who are themselves the essence of warmth, and can be contacted in the heat of the bodily frame, whether human or animal, and who are likewise the warmth  terrestrial. 
The Agnichaitans, a higher grade of fire spirit, who form a vortex of fire when viewed on a large scale, such as in volcanoes and large destructive burnings. They are closely allied to a still more important group of devas, who form the fiery envelope of the sun. 
The pranic elementals, those minute fiery essences who have the ability to permeate the texture of the human body, of a tree, or of all that may be found in the human, vegetable and animal kingdoms, and who blend with the fires of the microcosmic systems. 
Certain of the deva kingdom who may be described as ensouling certain of the great light rays, and Who are in Themselves the essence of those rays. Other forms of such elemental lives and of deva groups might be enumerated, but the above tabulation will suffice for our present purpose. 
2. The Astral Plane. 
The fiery essences of this plane are more difficult for us to comprehend, having not, as yet, the seeing eye upon that plane. They are in themselves the warmth and heat of the emotional body, and of the body of feeling. They are of a low order when upon the path of desire, and of a high order when upon the path of aspiration, for the elemental is then transmuted into the deva. 
Their grades and ranks are many, but their names matter not save in one instance. It may be of interest to know the appellation applied to the devas of fire whose part it is to tend the fires that will later destroy the causal body. We need to remember that it is the upspringing of the latent fire of matter and  its merging with two other fires that causes destruction. These elementals and devas are called the Agnisuryans, and in their totality are the fiery essences of buddhi, hence their lowest manifestation is on the sixth plane, the astral. 
Further information concerning these deva lives will be found further on in the Treatise, where they are dealt with at some length. 
DIVISION B - THE PERSONALITY RAY AND FIRE BY FRICTION 
I. The work of the three rays. 
1. The personality ray.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
2. The egoic ray. 
3. The monadic ray. 
II. The personality ray and the permanent atom. 
III. The personality ray and karma. 
I. THE WORK OF THE THREE RAYS 
We here touch upon a matter of wide general interest yet which is withal very little comprehended. I refer to the subject of the permanent atoms. 26Permanent Atom. An appropriated point of atomic matter. A tiny centre of force which forms the central factor and the attractive agency around which  the sheaths of the incarnating Monad are built. These are strung like pearls upon the sutratma, or thread. 
Ray. A stream of force or an emanation. The solar Logos, or the Macrocosm, manifests through three major rays and four minor rays. The Monad or microcosm likewise manifests through three rays as mentioned in the text above. All rays express a peculiar and specialised type of force. Triad. This is literally Atma-buddhi-manas, the expression of the Monad, just as the personality is the expression of the Ego. The Monad expresses itself through the Triad, and in its lowest or third Aspect forms the Egoic or Causal body, the infant or germinal Ego. Similarly, the Ego expresses itself through  the threefold lower man, mental, emotional, and etheric (these being the reflection of the higher Triad) and these three give rise to the dense physical manifestation.26 Each body or form wherein Spirit functions has, for its focal point on each plane, an atom composed of matter of the atomic subplane of each plane. This serves as a nucleus for the distribution of force, for the conservation of faculty, for the assimilation of experience, and for the preservation of memory. These atoms are in direct connection  with one or other of the three Great rays in connection with the microcosm:— 
a. The Monadic Ray, the synthetic ray of the microcosm. 
b. The Egoic Ray. 
c. The Personality Ray. 
Each of these rays has a connection with one or other of the permanent atoms in the lower threefold  man, and has a direct action upon the spirillae 27Occult Chemistry, p. 28. 27 found within the atom. We have noted in "Letters on Occult Meditation" that the atoms of the lower threefold man underwent a twofold process:— 
They were first vivified in rotation, and each held the light in ordered sequence until the lower triangle was entirely illumined. 
Eventually transmutation took place, or (to word it otherwise) the polarisation eventually shifted into  the three permanent atoms of the Triad, and out of the three permanent atoms of the lower triangle. The physical permanent atom is transcended and the polarisation becomes manasic or mental, the astral permanent atom is transcended and the polarisation becomes buddhic, while the mental unit is superseded by the permanent atom, of the fifth plane, the atmic. This is all brought about by the action  of the three rays upon the atoms and upon the life within each atom. The relationship between these three rays and the permanent atoms might be summarised as follows: 
The Personality Ray has direct action upon the physical permanent atom. 
The Egoic Ray has a similar action upon the astral permanent atom.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
The Monadic Ray has a close connection with the mental unit. 
The effect which they have is threefold, but is not simultaneous; they work ever, as do all things in Nature, in ordered cycles. The stimulation, for instance, that is the result of the action of the monadic Ray upon the mental unit is only felt when the aspirant treads the Path, or after he has taken the first Initiation. The action of the egoic Ray upon the astral permanent atom is felt as soon as the Ego can  make good connection with the physical brain; when this is so the egoic ray is beginning to affect the atom powerfully and continuously; this occurs when a man is highly evolved and is nearing the Path. This threefold force is felt in the following way: 
First. It plays upon the wall of the atom as an external force and affects its rotary and vibratory action. Second. It stimulates the inner fire of the atom and causes its light to shine with increasing brilliancy. Third. It works upon the spirillae, and brings them all gradually into play. 
II. THE PERSONALITY RAY AND THE PERMANENT ATOM 
The Personality Ray deals with the first four spirillae, and is the source of their stimulation. Note here the correspondence to the lower quaternary and its stimulation by the ego. The Egoic Ray concerns itself with the fifth spirilla and with the sixth, and is the cause of their emerging from latency and  potentiality into power and activity. The Monadic Ray is the source of the stimulation of the seventh  spirilla. 
There is great interest attached to this subject and wide reaches of thought and vast fields for investigation open up before the earnest student. This threefold action varies in point of time and  sequence according to the ray itself upon which the Monad may be found; but the subject is too vast to  be handled at this time. 
In looking at the matter from the standpoint of fire the idea may be grasped a little through the realisation that the latent fire of matter in the atom is brought into brilliance and usefulness by the action of the personality Ray which merges with this fire and stands in the same position to the permanent atom in the microcosm as FOHAT does on the cosmic plane. The fire is there hidden within  the sphere (whether the sphere systemic or the sphere atomic) and the personality Ray in the one case, and Fohat in the other, acts as the force which brings latency into activity and potentiality into  demonstrated power. This correspondence should be thought out with care and judgment. Just as Fohat has to do with active manifestation or objectivity, so the personality Ray has to do with the third, or activity aspect in the microcosm. The work of the third aspect logoic was the arranging of the matter of the system so that eventually it could be built into form through the power of the second aspect. Thus the correspondence works out. By life upon the physical plane (that life wherein the physical permanent atom has its full demonstration) the matter is arranged and separated that must eventually be built into the Temple of Solomon, the egoic body, through the agency of the egoic life, the second  aspect. In the quarry of the personal life are the stones prepared for the great Temple. In existence upon the physical plane and in the objective personal life is that experience gained which demonstrates as faculty in the Ego. What is here suggested would richly repay our closest attention, and open up  before us reaches of ideas, which should eventuate in a wiser comprehension, a sounder judgment, and  a greater encouragement to action. 
III. THE PERSONALITY RAY AND KARMA
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
It might be wise here to recapitulate a little so that in the refreshing of the memory may come the basis of further knowledge. We dealt first with the three fires of the system, macrocosmic and microcosmic, and having laid down certain hypotheses we passed to the consideration of the first of the fires, that which is inherent in matter. Having studied it somewhat in its threefold manifestation in the various parts of the system, including man, we took up the matter of the personality Ray and its relationship to  this third fire. We must recall here that all that has been dealt with has been in relation to matter, and  for the whole of this first section this thought must be borne carefully in mind. 
In our second section we will consider all from the standpoint of mind, and in the final from the standpoint of the Divine Ray. Here we are dealing with what H. P. B. calls the primordial ray and its manifestations in matter. 2828 All these Rays of Cosmic Mind, Primordial Activity, and Divine Love Wisdom are but essential quality demonstrating through the agency of some one factor. 
The Primordial Ray is the quality of motion, demonstrating through matter. 
The Ray of Mind is the quality of intelligent organisation, demonstrating through forms, which are the product of motion and matter. 
The Ray of Love-Wisdom is the quality of basic motive that utilises the intelligent organisation of matter in motion to demonstrate in one synthetic whole the great Love aspect of the Logos. 2929 
This line of thought can be worked out also correspondingly in the Microcosm, and will show how individual man is engaged in the same type of work on a lesser scale as the solar Logos. 
At this point in the treatise we are confining our attention to the Ray of Active Matter, or to that latent heat in substance which underlies its activity and is the cause of its motion. If we think with sincerity  and with clarity we will see how closely therefore the Lipika Lords or the Lords of Karma are associated with this work. Three of Them are closely connected with Karma as it concerns one or other of the three great Rays, or the three FIRES, while the fourth Lipika Lord synthesizes the work of his three Brothers and attends to the uniform blending and merging of the three fires. On our planet, the Earth, They find Their points of contact through the three "Buddhas of Activity," 30Theosophical Glossary.30 (the correspondence should be noted here) and the fourth Kumara, the Lord of the World. Therefore, we arrive at the realisation that the personality Ray, in its relation to the fire of matter, is directly influenced and adjusted in its working by one of the Buddhas of Activity. 
The karma 31Some Thoughts on the Gita, p. 4031, 32The Lipika are the Spirits of the Universe. They  are connected with the Law of Cause and Effect (Karma) and its recorders. Lipika comes from "Lipi" writing. For information concerning the Lipika Lords see S. D., I, pp. 152, 153. The Buddhas of Activity, are the Triad Who stands closest to Sanat Kumara, The Lord of the World. They are the planetary correspondences to the three Aspects of the logoic third Aspect and are concerned with the force behind planetary manifestation. 
Monadic Essence, the matter of the atomic (or highest) subplane of each plane. Elemental Essence, the matter of the six subplanes which are non atomic. It is molecular matter.32, 33"Karma may be defined  to be the force generated by a human centre to act on the exterior world, and the reactionary influence that is in turn generated from the exterior world to act on him may be called karmic influence and the visible result that is produced by this influence under proper conditions may be called karmic fruit."— Some Thoughts on the Gita, p. 53.33 of matter itself is an abstruse subject and has as yet scarcely been  hinted at. It is nevertheless indissolubly mixed up with the karma of the individual. It involves a
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
control of the evolution of the monadic essence, the elemental essence and of the atomic matter of the plane; it is concerned with the development of the four spirillae, with their activity, with their attachment to forms when atomic, and with the development of the inner latent heat and its gradual fiery increase until we have within the atom a repetition of what is seen within the causal body: the destruction of the periphery of the atom by the means of burning. It deals with the subject of the building of matter into form by the interaction of the two rays, the Divine and the Primordial, producing thereby that fire by friction which tends to life and fusing. 
The karma of form is likewise a vast subject, too involved for average comprehension but a factor of real importance which should not be overlooked in connection with the evolution of a world, a synthesis of worlds, or of a system when viewed from higher levels. Everything is, in its totality, the result of action taken by cosmic Essences and Entities in earlier solar systems, which is working out through the individual atoms, and through those congeries of atoms which we call forms. The effect of the personality Ray upon the internal fires is therefore, in effect, the result of the influence of the planetary Logos of whatever ray is implicated, as He works out that portion of Karma which falls to  His share in any one cycle, greater or lesser. He thus brings about and eventually transmutes, the effects of causes which He set in motion earlier in relation to His six Brothers, the other planetary  Logoi. We get an illustrative parallel in the effect which one individual will have upon another in  worldly contact, in moulding and influencing, in stimulating or retarding. We have to remember that all fundamental influence and effects are felt on the astral plane and work thence through the etheric to  the dense physical thereby bringing matter under its sphere of influence, yet not itself originating on the physical plane. 
DIVISION C - THE ETHERIC BODY AND PRANA 
THE ETHERIC BODY AND PRANA 34Serpent Power, pp. 94, 95.34 
I. The nature of the etheric body. 
1. Its purpose and description. 
2. Eight statements. 
II. The nature of prana. 
1. Solar prana. 
2. Planetary prana. 
3. The prana of forms. 
III. The function of the etheric body. 
1. It is the receiver of prana. 
2. It is the assimilator of prana. 
3. It is the transmitter of prana. 
4. Disorders of the etheric body. 
IV. Macrocosmic and microcosmic ethers. 
1. The planetary Logos and the ethers. 
2. Cosmic and systemic ethers. 
3. Protective purpose of etheric body. 
V. Death and the etheric body. 
1. Microcosmic death. 
2. Macrocosmic pralaya.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
I. THE NATURE OF THE ETHERIC BODY 
In our consideration of the internal fires of the system we shall find much of very real interest to the coming generation of thinkers for three main reasons, which might be enumerated as follows: 
1. Its Purpose and Description 
First. In the study of the etheric body lies hid (for scientists and those of the medical profession) a fuller comprehension of the laws of matter and the laws of health. The word health has become too localised in the past, and its meaning confined to the sanity of the body corporeal, to the co-operative action of the atoms of the physical body of man, and to the full expression of the powers of the physical elemental. In days to come it will be realised that the health of man is dependent upon the health of all allied evolutions, and upon the co-operative action and full expression of the matter of the planet and of the planetary elemental who is himself a composite manifestation of the physical elementals of all manifested nature. 
Second. In the study of the etheric body and prana lies the revelation of the effects of those rays of the sun which (for lack of better expression), we will call "solar pranic emanations." These solar pranic emanations are the produced effect of the central heat of the sun approaching other bodies within the solar system by one of the three main channels of contact, and producing on the bodies then contacted  certain effects differing somewhat from those produced by the other emanations. These effects might be considered as definitely stimulating and constructive, and (through their essential quality) as producing conditions that further the growth of cellular matter, and concern its adjustment to environing conditions; they concern likewise the internal health (demonstrating as the heat of the atom and its consequent activity) and the uniform evolution of the form of which that particular atom of matter forms a constituent part. Emanative prana does little in connection with form building; that is not its province, but it conserves the form through the preservation of the health of its component parts. Other rays of the sun act differently, upon the forms and upon their substance. Some perform the work  of the Destroyer of forms, and others carry on the work of cohering and of attracting; the work of the Destroyer and of the Preserver is carried on under the Law of Attraction and Repulsion. Some rays definitely produce accelerated motion, others produce retardation. The ones we are dealing with  here—pranic solar emanations—work within the four ethers, that matter which (though physical) is not as yet objectively visible to the eye of man. They are the basis of all physical plane life considered  solely in connection with the life of the physical plane atoms of matter, their inherent heat and their rotary motion. These emanations are the basis of that "fire by friction" which demonstrates in the activity of matter. 
Finally, in the study of the etheric body and prana comes comprehension of the method of logoic manifestation, and therefore much of interest to the metaphysician, and all abstract thinkers. The etheric body of man holds hid the secret of his objectivity. It has its correspondence on the archetypal plane,—the plane we call that of the divine manifestation, the first plane of our solar system, the plane Adi. The matter of that highest plane is called often the "sea of fire" and it is the root of the akasha, the term applied to the substance of the second plane of manifestation. Let us trace the analogy a little more in detail, for in its just apprehension will be found much of illumination and much that will serve to elucidate problems both macrocosmic and microcosmic. We will begin with man and his etheric body.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
The etheric body has been described as a network, permeated with fire, or as a web, animated with  golden light. It is spoken of in the Bible as the "golden bowl." It is a composition of that matter of the physical plane which we call etheric, and its shape is brought about by the fine interlacing strands of this matter being built by the action of the lesser Builders into the form or mould upon which later the dense physical body can be moulded. Under the Law of Attraction, the denser matter of the physical plane is made to cohere to this vitalised form, and is gradually built up around it, and within it, until the interpenetration is so complete that the two forms make but one unit; the pranic emanations of the etheric body itself play upon the dense physical body in the same manner as the pranic emanations of the sun play upon the etheric body. It is all one vast system of transmission and of interdependence within the system. All receive in order to give, and to pass on to that which is lesser or not so evolved. Upon every plane this process can be seen. 
Thus the etheric body forms the archetypal plane in relation to the dense physical body. The thinker on  his own plane stands, in relation to the physical, as the Logos to His system. In the synthesis of thought it might be expressed thus: The thinker on the astral plane, the plane of desire and of necessity, stands to the physical body as the Logos on the cosmic astral plane stands to His system. 
As we continue the study we will work out the correspondence in the cosmos, the system, and in the three worlds, for we need to remember that the analogy must be perfect. 
1. Man, the Microcosm, the manifesting Monad, or One. 
2. The Heavenly Man, the planetary Logos, or the manifesting group. 
3. The Grand Man of the Heavens, the Macrocosm, the solar Logos, the manifestation of all groups and  of all evolutions within His Body, the solar system. 
All these bodies—the body of a man, a planetary Logos, and a solar Logos—are the product of desire originating on the planes of abstract mind, whether cosmic, systemic, or mind in the three worlds, whether cosmic desire-mind or human desire-mind, and all their bodies are "Sons of Necessity," as H. P. B. so aptly expressed it. 3535, 36 thing below."—Some Thoughts on the Gita, pp. 18, 134.36 
2. Eight Statements. 
It is with the etheric bodies of all we are dealing, and with their vivification by prana (whether cosmic, solar, planetary or human), with the organs of reception and with the basis of emanations. Here, therefore, we can arrive at certain dicta anent the etheric body which for purposes of clarity might well be enumerated: 
First. The etheric body is the mould of the physical body. 
Second. The etheric body is the archetype upon which the dense physical form is built, whether it is the form of a solar system, or of a human body in any one incarnation. 
Third. The etheric body is a web or network of fine interlacing channels, formed of matter of the four ethers, and built into a specific form. It forms a focal point for certain radiatory emanations, which  vivify, stimulate and produce the rotary action of matter. 
Fourth. These pranic emanations when focalised and received, react upon the dense matter which is built upon the etheric scaffolding and framework.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
Fifth. This etheric web, during incarnation, forms a barrier between the physical and astral planes, which can only be transcended when consciousness is sufficiently developed to permit of escape. This can be seen in both the microcosm and the macrocosm. When a man has, through meditation and  concentration, expanded his consciousness to a certain point he is enabled to include the subtler planes, and to escape beyond the limits of the dividing web. 
(stop) 
PHYSICAL SUB-PLANES SOLAR SYSTEM PLANES 
1. First ether. Atomic plane ---------- Adi. Divine. Sea of fire. First cosmic ether. 2. Second ether. Sub-atomic --------- Anupadaka. Monadic plane. Akasha. Second cosmic ether. 3. Third ether. Super-etheric--------- Atmic. Spiritual plane. Aether. Third cosmic ether. 4. Fourth ether. Super-gaseous ------ Buddhic. Intuitional Plane. Air. Fourth cosmic ether. 
DENSE PHYSICAL PLANES OF HUMANITY 
5. Gaseous. Sub-etheric -------------- Mental. Fire. Cosmic gaseous. 
6. Liquid -------------------------------- Astral. Emotional plane. Water. Cosmic liquid. 7. Earthly. Dense---------------------- Physical plane. Earth. Cosmic dense. 
When the Logos has expanded His Consciousness on cosmic levels He can then transcend the logoic etheric web, and escape beyond the ring-pass-not of His objective manifestation. In thinking out this analogy we must hold closely in mind the fact that the seven major planes of our solar system are the seven subplanes of the cosmic physical or the lowest cosmic plane. 
We might note here the accurate working out of the correspondence in matter and the radiatory  correspondence is equally accurate. 
Sixth. In all the three bodies—human, planetary, and systemic or logoic—will be found a great organ within the organism which acts as the receiver of prana. This organ has its etheric manifestation and its dense physical correspondence. 
In the system. In the system, the organ of cosmic prana, of the force vitalising matter, is the central sun, which is the direct receiver and dispenser of cosmic radiation. This is one of the threefold  divisions of the Primordial Ray of active intelligence. Each of the cosmic Rays is in essence threefold, a fact which is oft overlooked, though logically obvious; each Ray is the vehicle for a cosmic Entity, and all existence is necessarily triple in manifestation. The central Sun has within its periphery a centre of reception with a surface radiation. 
In the Planet. In the planet there will be found a similar organ or receiver within its etheric body, the locality of which is not for exoteric publication and cannot therefore be revealed. It is connected with  the location of the two poles, north and south, and is the centre around which the globe rotates, and is the source of the legend of a sacred fertile land within the sphere of polar influences. The mythic land  of exceeding fertility, of abundant luxuriance, and of phenomenal growth, vegetable, animal and human would naturally lie where prana is received. It is the esoteric Garden of Eden, the land of physical perfection. Surface radiation demonstrates, after distribution, as planetary prana. 
In Man. The organ of reception is the spleen through its etheric counterpart. After distribution over the
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
entire body via the etheric network it demonstrates in surface radiation as the health aura. 
Seventh. Thus in all the three bodies will the resemblance clearly be seen, and the working out in  perfect correspondence is easily demonstrable: 
PRANA OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM 
THE SOLAR SYSTEM 
Entity manifesting --------------------- The solar Logos. 
Body of manifestation----------------- The solar system. 
Receptive centre ----------------------- Pole of the central Sun. 
Surface radiation or emanation------- Solar prana. 
Movement produced------------------- Systemic rotation. 
Distributive effect---------------------- Solar etheric radiation (felt cosmically). 
THE PLANET 
Entity manifesting --------------------- A planetary Logos. 
Body of manifestation----------------- A planet. 
Receptive centre ----------------------- The planetary pole. 
Surface radiation or emanation------- Planetary prana. 
Movement produced------------------- Planetary rotation. 
Distributive effect---------------------- Planetary etheric radiation (felt within the system). A HUMAN BEING 
Entity manifesting --------------------- The thinker, a Dhyan Chohan 
Body of manifestation----------------- Physical body. 
Receptive centre ----------------------- The spleen. 
Surface radiation or emanation------- Health aura. 
Movement produced------------------- Atomic rotation. 
Distributive effect---------------------- Human etheric radiation (felt by environment). THE ATOM OF MATTER 
Entity manifesting --------------------- An elementary life. 
Body of manifestation----------------- The atomic sphere. 
Receptive centre ----------------------- Pole of the atom. 
Surface radiation or emanation------- Contribution of atom to the united health aura of body. Movement produced------------------- Atomic rotation. 
Distributive effect---------------------- Atomic etheric radiation (felt within the physical form). 
Eighth. When the "will to live" vanishes, then the "Sons of Necessity" cease from objective manifestation. This is logically inevitable, and its working out can be seen in every case of entifed  objectivity. When the Thinker on his own plane withdraws his attention from his little system within the three worlds and gathers within himself all his forces, then physical plane existence comes to an end and all returns within the causal consciousness; this is as much an abstraction in the three worlds of
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
the Thinker as the Absolute is in the threefold solar system of the Logos. This demonstrates on the physical plane in the withdrawing from out of the top of the head of the radiant etheric body and the consequent disintegration of the physical. The framework goes and the dense physical form falls apart; the pranic life is abstracted bodily from out of the dense sheath, and the stimulation of the fires of matter ceases to be. The latent fire of the atom remains; it is inherent, but the form is made by the action of the two fires of matter—active and latent, radiatory and inherent—aided by the fire of the second Logos, and when they are separated the form falls apart. This is a picture in miniature of the essential duality of all things acted upon by Fohat. 
There is a close connection between the spleen and the top of the head in connection with the etheric body. The organ of the spleen has an interesting correspondence to the umbilical cord which attaches an infant to the mother for purposes of nourishment, and which is separated at birth. When a man starts to live his own life of conscious desire, when a man is born into a new world of a subtler form of life, that interlaced cord of etheric matter (which had united him to his physical body) is broken; the "silver cord is loosed" and the man severs his connection with the dense physical body and passes out through  the highest center of the body instead of the lowest to life in a higher world and of another dimension. So it will be found in all the bodies and sheaths of the microcosm, for the analogy will persist on all planes during manifestation. When more scientific knowledge has been gained it will be found that the same procedure on a larger scale, takes place in planetary manifestation. A planet is but the body of a planetary Logos, that body being etheric, and the Logos expressing Himself through it and building  upon the etheric scaffolding a vehicle of manifestation. The MOON once was the body of expression  for one of the Logoi; the Earth now is, and the cycles change continuously. The centre of escape for the etheric body is found likewise in a physical planet, and the planetary silver cord is loosed at the time appointed; but the times and cycles, their commencement and termination are hid in the mysteries of Initiation, and do not concern us. 
Again in the solar system itself similar action will eventuate at the close of a Mahamanvantara. The Logos will withdraw within Himself, abstracting His three major principles. 37Principles, the basic differentiations, essential qualities or types of energy upon which all things are built; they give the distinctive nature of all forms.37 His body of manifestation—the Sun and the seven sacred Planets, all existing in etheric matter—will withdraw from objectivity and become obscured. From the usual physical standpoint, the light of the system will go out. This will be succeeded by a gradual inbreathing until He shall have gathered all unto Himself; the etheric will cease to exist, and the web  will be no more. Full consciousness will be achieved, and in the moment of achievement existence or entified manifestation will cease. All will be reabsorbed within the Absolute; pralaya, 38 Pralaya....A period of obscuration or repose—planetary, systemic or cosmic. An interlude between two periods of manifestation.38 or the cosmic heaven of rest will then ensue, and the Voice of the Silence will be heard no more. The reverberations of the WORD will die away, and the "Silence of the High Places" will reign supreme. 
II. THE NATURE OF PRANA 
In dealing with the subject of the etheric body and its functions as an assimilator and distributor of prana, we have dealt with it from the standpoint of its place in the scheme of things. We have considered this matter of etherics from the angle of correspondences, and have traced analogies in the system, the planet, and man. We have seen that it formed the foundation of the dense physical form, and in itself constituted a most important link between:
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
a. Physical man, and the emotional or astral plane. 
b. Planetary Man, and essential emotional quality. 
c. The Logos, the grand Heavenly Man, and the cosmic astral plane. 
We might now narrow the subject down to the consideration of the etheric body of the human being and not touch upon correspondences to things systemic or cosmic at all, though it may be necessary to  remind ourselves that for the wise student the line along which wisdom comes is the interpretative one; he who knows himself (in objective manifestation, essential quality, and comprehensive development) knows likewise the Lord of his Ray, and the Logos of his system. It is only then a matter of application, conscious expansion, and intelligent interpretation, coupled to a wise abstention from dogmatic assertion, and a recognition that the correspondence lies in quality and method more than in  detailed adherence to a specified action at any given time in evolution. 
All that it is possible to give here is material which, if rightly pondered on, may result in more intelligent practical living in the occult sense of the term "living"; which, if studied scientifically, religiously and philosophically, may lead to the furthering of the aims of the evolutionary process in  the immediately coming lesser cycle. Our aim, therefore, is to make the secondary body of man more real, and to show some of its functions and how it can eventually be brought consciously into the range of mental comprehension. 
Science, as we know, is fast reaching the point where it will be forced to admit the fact of the etheric body, because the difficulties of refusing to acknowledge it, will be far more insuperable than an  admission of its existence. Scientists admit already the fact of etheric matter; the success of photographic endeavor has demonstrated the reality of that which has hitherto been considered unreal, because (from the standpoint of the physical) intangible. Phenomena are occurring all the time which remain in the domain of the supernatural unless accounted for through the medium of etheric matter, and in their anxiety to prove the spiritualists wrong, scientists have aided the cause of the true and  higher spiritism by falling back on reality, and on the fact of the etheric body, even though they  consider it a body of emanative radiation—being concerned with the effect and not having yet ascertained the cause. Medical men are beginning to study (blindly as yet) the question of vitality, the effect of solar rays upon the physical organism, and the underlying laws of inherent and radiatory heat. They are beginning to ascribe to the spleen functions hitherto not recognised, to study the effect of the action of the glands, and their relation to the assimilation of the vital essences by the bodily frame. They are on the right road, and before long (perhaps within this century) the FACT of the etheric body  and its basic function will be established past all controversy, and the whole aim of preventive and  curative medicine will shift to a higher level. All we can do here is to give simply, and in a condensed  form, a few facts which may hasten the day of recognition, and further the interest of the true investigator. Let me, therefore, briefly state what will be dealt with in our remaining three points: 
The functions of the etheric body. 
Its relation to the physical during life. 
The ills or diseases of the etheric body (taking care to retain the original meaning of the word "disease.") 
Its after death condition. 
This will embody all that is as yet of practical use. More may later be forthcoming for our helping if that which is now given to the public is carefully followed up, and if investigators wisely, sanely and broadly study this important matter.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
As the nature and functions of the etheric body of man assume their rightful place in the thought of the world and as it is realised that the etheric is the most important of the two physical bodies, man will be brought into closer conscious contact with the other evolutions that evolve in etheric matter just as he does in a dense physical body. There are certain large groups of devas, called "the devas of the shadows," or the violet devas, who are closely allied with the evolutionary development of man's etheric body, and who transmit to him solar and planetary radiation. The etheric body of man receives prana in different ways and of different kinds, and all these ways bring him into touch with varying  entities. 
1. Solar prana. 
This is that vital and magnetic fluid which radiates from the sun, and which is transmitted to man's etheric body through the agency of certain deva entities of a very high order, and of a golden hue. It is passed through their bodies and emitted as powerful radiations, which are applied direct through certain  plexi in the uppermost part of the etheric body, the head and shoulders, and passed down to the etheric correspondence of the physical organ, the spleen, and from thence forcibly transmitted into the spleen  itself. These golden hued pranic entities are in the air above us, and are specially active in such parts of the world as California, in those tropical countries where the air is pure and dry, and the rays of the sun  are recognised as being specially beneficial. Relations between man and this group of devas are very close, but fraught as yet with much danger to man. These devas are of a very powerful order, and, along their own line, are further evolved than man himself. Unprotected man lies at their mercy, and in  this lack of protection, and man's failure to understand the laws of magnetic resistance, or of solar repulsion comes, for instance, the menace of sunstroke. When the etheric body and its assimilative processes are comprehended scientifically, man will then be immune from dangers due to solar radiation. He will protect himself by the application of the laws governing magnetic repulsion and  attraction, and not so much by clothing and shelter. It is largely a question of polarisation. One hint might here be given: When men understand the deva evolution somewhat more correctly and recognise their work along certain lines in connection with the Sun and realise that they represent the feminine pole as they themselves represent the masculine (the fourth Creative Hierarchy being  male) 3939 they will comprehend the mutual relationship, and govern that relationship by law. 
These solar devas take the radiatory rays of the sun which reach from its centre to the periphery along one of the three channels of approach, pass them through their organism and focalise them there. They  act almost as a burning glass acts. These rays are then reflected or transmitted to man's etheric body, and caught up by him and again assimilated. When the etheric body is in good order and functioning correctly, enough of this prana is absorbed to keep the form organised. This is the whole object of the etheric body's functioning, and is a point which cannot be sufficiently emphasised. The remainder is cast off in the form of animal radiation, or physical magnetism—all terms expressing the same idea. Man therefore repeats on a lesser scale the work of the great solar devas, and in his turn adds his quota of repolarised or remagnetised emanation to the sumtotal of the planetary aura. 
2. Planetary prana. 
This is the vital fluid emanated from any planet, which constitutes its basic coloring or quality, and is produced by a repetition within the planet of the same process which is undergone in connection with man and solar prana. The planet (the Earth, or any other planet) absorbs solar prana, assimilates what is required, and radiates off that which is not essential to its well-being in the form of planetary 
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
radiation. Planetary prana, therefore, is solar prana which has passed throughout the planet, has circulated through the planetary etheric body, has been transmitted to the dense physical planet, and has been cast off thence in the form of a radiation of the same essential character as solar prana, plus the individual and distinctive quality of the particular planet concerned. This again repeats the process undergone in the human body. The physical radiations of men differ according to the quality of their physical bodies. So it is with a planet. 
Planetary emanative prana (as in the case of solar prana) is caught up and transmitted via a particular group of devas, called the "devas of the shadows," who are ethereal devas of a slightly violet hue. Their bodies are composed of the matter of one or other of the four ethers, and they focalise and  concentrate the emanations of the planet, and of all forms upon the planet. They have a specially close connection with human beings owing to the fact of the essential resemblance of their bodily substance to man's etheric substance, and because they transmit to him the magnetism of "Mother Earth" as it is called. Therefore we see that there are two groups of devas working in connection with man: 
a. Solar devas, who transmit the vital fluid which circulates in the etheric body. b. Planetary devas of a violet color, who are allied to man's etheric body, and who transmit earth's prana, or the prana of whichever planet man may be functioning upon during a physical incarnation. 
A very pertinent question might here be asked, and though we may not fully explain the mystery, a few suggestive hints may be possible. We might ask: What causes the apparent deadness of the Moon? Is there deva life upon it? Does solar prana have no effect there? What constitutes the difference between the apparently dead Moon, and a live planet, such as the Earth? 4040 
Here we touch upon a hidden mystery, of which the solution lies revealed for those who seek, in the fact that human beings and certain groups of devas are no longer found upon the Moon. Man has not ceased to exist upon the Moon because it is dead and cannot therefore support his life, but the Moon is dead because man and these deva groups have been removed from off its surface and from its sphere of influence. 4141: S. D., I, 179.41 Man and the devas act on every planet as intermediaries, or as transmitting agencies. Where they are not found, then certain great activities become impossible, and disintegration sets in. The reason for this removal lies in the cosmic Law of Cause and Effect, or cosmic karma, and in the composite, yet individual, history of that one of the Heavenly Men Whose body, the Moon or any other dead planet at any time happened to be. 
3. The prana of forms. 
It must first be pointed out that forms are necessarily of two kinds, each having a different place in the scheme: 
Forms that are the result of the work of the third and the second Logos, and Their united life. Such  forms are the units in the vegetable, animal and mineral kingdoms. 
Forms that are the result of the united action of the three Logoi, and comprise the strictly deva and human forms. 
There is also the still simpler form embodied in the substance of which all the other forms are made. This matter is strictly speaking the atomic and molecular matter, and is animated by the life or energy of the third Logos.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
CHART II — LOGOS OF A SOLAR SYSTEM 
In dealing with the first group of forms, it must be noted that the pranic emanations given off by units of the animal and vegetable kingdom (after they have absorbed both solar and planetary prana) are naturally a combination of the two, and are transmitted by means of surface radiation, as in solar and  planetary prana, to certain lesser groups of devas of a not very high order, who have a curious and  intricate relationship to the group soul of the radiating animal or vegetable. This matter cannot be dealt with here. These devas are also of a violet hue, but of such a pale color as to be almost grey; they are in a transitional state, and merge with a puzzling confusion with groups of entities that are almost on  the involutionary arc. 42 Involutionary Arc is the term applied to the first part of the evolutionary process. It covers the "path of descent," or the coming down of Spirit into ever denser matter until the lowest point is reached, the point of densest concretion. The latter half of the process is called  evolutionary and marks the ascent or return of Spirit to its emanating source, plus the gains of the evolutionary process.42, 43 "The Three Outpourings. In the diagram the "symbols of the three Aspects (of the Logos) are placed outside of time and space, and only the streams of influence from them descend into our system of planes....They represent in due order what are commonly called the three Persons of the Trinity....It will be seen that from each of them an outpouring of life or force is projected  into the planes below. The first of these in order is the straight line which descends from the third  Aspect; the second is that part of the large oval which lies on our left hand—the stream which descends from the second Aspect until it has touched the lowest point in matter, and then rises again up the side on our right hand until it reaches the lower mental level. It will be noted that in both of these outpourings the divine life becomes darker and more veiled as it descends into matter, until at the lowest point we might almost fail to recognise it as divine life at all; but as it rises again when it has passed its nadir it shows itself somewhat more clearly. The third outpouring which descends from the highest aspect of the Logos differs from the others in that it is in no way clouded by the matter through  which it passes, but retains its virgin purity and splendour untarnished. It will be noted that this outpouring descends only to the level of the buddhic plane (the fourth plane) and that the link between  the two is formed by a triangle in a circle, representing the individual soul of man—the reincarnating  ego. Here the triangle is contributed by the third outpouring and the circle by the second...."—The Christian Creed, by C. W. Leadbeater, pp. 39, 40.43, 4443a See S. D., I, 98, 99, 100, 103. 1. The root of life was in every drop of the ocean of immortality. Every atom in matter was impregnated with the life of the Logos. 
2. The ocean was radiant light, which was Fire, Heat, Motion. These three are the subjective life manifesting objectively. Fire: The essence of the first Logos. Electric fire. Spirit. Heat: Duality. The essence of the second Logos. Solar fire. The Son aspect. Consciousness. Motion: The essence of the third Logos. Fire by friction. Matter. 
THE MACROCOSM 
First Logos------------ Fire -------------------- The will to live or to be. Electric. Second Logos--------- Heat-------------------- Duality, or love between two. Solar. Third Logos-----------Motion ---------------- The fire of mind, the relation between. Fire by friction. 
This is the subjective expression. 
The Sun------------------------------------------ Will or power. 
Venus-Mercury --------------------------------- Love and Wisdom. 
Saturn-------------------------------------------- Activity or intelligence. 
This is the objective expression.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
THE MICROCOSM. 
The Monad ------------Electric fire ----------- Will or power. 
The Ego---------------- Solar fire -------------- Love and wisdom. 
The Personality ------- Fire by friction ------- Activity or intelligence. 
This is the subjective expression. 
The mental body------Will or power--------- Fire. 
The astral body -------Love-wisdom--------- Heat. 
The physical body---- Active intelligence--- Motion. 
This is the objective expression. 
Physical body. 
The brain --------------Monad----------------- Will or power. Electric fire. 
The heart --------------Ego -------------------- Love-wisdom. Solar fire. 
Lower organs --------- Personality------------ Active intelligence. 
43a 
In dealing with the second group, the human form transmits the emanative radiations to a much higher grade of deva. These devas are of a more pronounced hue, and after due assimilation of the human  radiation, they transmit it principally to the animal kingdom, thus demonstrating the close relationship between the two kingdoms. If the above explanation of the intricate inter-relation between the sun and  the planets, between the planets and the evolving forms upon them, between the forms themselves in  ever descending importance demonstrates nothing more than the exquisite interdependence of all existences, then much will have been achieved. 
Another fact which must also be brought out is the close relationship between all these evolutions of nature, from the celestial sun down to the humblest violet via the deva evolution which acts as the transmitting transmuting force throughout the system. 
Lastly, all work with fire. Fire internal, inherent and latent; fire radiatory and emanative; fire generated, assimilated and radiated; fire vivifying stimulating, and destroying; fire transmitted, reflected, and absorbed; fire, the basis of all life; fire, the essence of all existence; fire, the means of development, and the impulse behind all evolutionary process; fire, the builder, the preserver and the constructor; fire, the originator, the process and the goal; fire the purifier and the consumer. The God  of Fire and the fire of God interacting upon each other, till all fires blend and blaze and till all that exists, is passed through the fire—from a solar system to an ant—and emerges as a triple perfection. Fire then passes out from the ring-pass-not as perfected essence, whether essence emerging from the human ring-pass-not, the planetary ring-pass-not or the solar. The wheel of fire turns and all within that wheel is subjected to the threefold flame, and eventually stands perfected. 
III. THE FUNCTION OF THE ETHERIC BODY 
We will now continue with the discussion of the etheric body, and take up the consideration of its function and its relation to the physical body. 
The two may wisely be considered together, for the inter-relation is so close that it is not possible to  discuss them separately. Primarily the functions of the etheric body are three in number: 
1. It is the receiver of prana.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
2. It is the assimilator of prana. 
3. It is the transmitter of prana. 
1. The receiver of prana. 
The etheric body may therefore be described as negative or receptive in respect to the rays of the sun, and as positive and expulsive in respect to the dense physical body. The second function—that of assimilation—is strictly balanced or internal. As stated earlier, the pranic emanations of the sun are absorbed by the etheric body, via certain centres which are found principally in the upper part of the body, from whence they are directed downwards to the centre which is called the etheric spleen, as it is the counterpart in etheric matter of that organ. The main centre for the reception of prana at present is a centre between the shoulder blades. Another has been allowed to become partially dormant in man  through the abuses of so-called civilisation, and is situated slightly above the solar plexus. In the coming rootrace, and increasingly in this, the necessity for the exposure of these two centres to the rays of the sun, will be appreciated, with a corresponding improvement in physical vitality and adaptability. These three centres, 
1. Between the shoulder blades, 
2. Above the diaphragm, 
3. And the spleen 
make, if one could but see it, a radiant etheric triangle, which triangle is the originating impulse for the later pranic circulation throughout the entire system. The etheric body is really a net-work of fine channels, which are the component parts of one interlacing fine cord,—one portion of this cord being the magnetic link which unites the physical and the astral bodies and which is snapped or broken after the withdrawal of the etheric body from the dense physical body at the time of death. The silver cord is loosed, as the Bible expresses it 4544 and this is the basis of the legend of the fateful sister who cuts the thread of life with the dreaded shears. 
The etheric web is composed of the intricate weaving of this vitalised cord, and apart from the seven  centres within the web (which correspond to the sacred centres, and of which the spleen is frequently counted as one) it has the two above mentioned, which make—with the spleen—a triangle of activity. 
The etheric web of the solar system is of an analogous nature, and likewise has its three receptive centres for cosmic prana. The mysterious band in the heavens, which we call the Milky Way, (S. D. II.250) is closely connected with cosmic prana, or that cosmic vitality or nourishment which vitalises the solar etheric system. 
2. The assimilator of prana. 
The process of assimilation is carried on in this triangle, and the prana which enters into either centre, circulates three times around the triangle before being transmitted to all parts of the etheric vehicle and  from thence to the dense physical body. The main organ of assimilation is the spleen—the etheric centre and the dense physical organ. The vital essence from the sun is passed into the etheric spleen, and is there subjected to a process of intensification or devitalisation, according to the condition, healthy or not, of that organ. If the man is in a healthy state the emanation received will be augmented  by his own individual vibration, and its rate of vibration will be keyed up before it is passed on into the physical spleen; or it will be slowed down and lowered if the man is in a poor condition of health.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
These three centres are in the form that all centres take, of saucer-like depressions, resembling  somewhat the appearance of small whirlpools, and which draw within their sphere of influence the currents that come their way. 
The centres should be pictured as whirling vortices with a closely woven threefold channel passing  from each centre to the other, and forming an almost separate circulatory system. This finds its point of departure for the entire system at the further side of the spleen to that at which the prana entered. The vital fluid circulates through and between these three centres three times, before it finally passes out from them to the periphery of its little system. This final circulation carries the prana, via the fine interlacing channels, to every part of the body, which becomes entirely impregnated by these emanations, if it might be so expressed. These emanations find their way finally out of the etheric system by means of surface radiation. The pranic essence escapes from the circumference of its temporary ring-pass-not as emanative human prana, which is the same prana as earlier received, plus the peculiar quality that any single individual may convey to it during its transitory circulation. The essence escapes, plus individual quality. 
Here again can be seen the correspondence to the escape of all essences from within any ring-pass-not when the cycle has been completed. 
This matter of the etheric body is of a very practical interest, and when its importance is better realised, men will attend to the distribution of prana within the body with closer attention, and will see that the vitalisation of the body, via the three centres, proceeds unhindered. 
The subject has necessarily to be handled in a superficial manner, and only outlines and scattered hints can be given. Nevertheless, it will be found that if this teaching is studied with care, it will convey a knowledge of truths whose calibre and content will prove invaluable and of a kind hitherto not given out. The place of the etheric sheath as a separator or ring-pass-not, and its functions as a receiver and distributor of prana, are dealt with here in a larger sense than heretofore, and the subject may later be enlarged. 
Two fundamental truths stand out from the aggregate of facts so slightly dealt with here: First. The fourth etheric subplane of the physical plane is the immediate concern of 
a. Man, the Microcosm, 
b. The Heavenly Man, the planetary Logos, 
c. The Grand Man of the Heavens, the solar Logos. 
Second. In this fourth chain and fourth round, the fourth ether is beginning to be studied, and—viewed  as a separating web—it permits occasional exit to those of suitable vibration. 
3. The Transmitter of Prana. 
We have touched but little on the subject of the fire, the purpose of the etheric body being to convey it and distribute it to all parts of its system. We have dwelt on facts which might stimulate interest and emphasise the utility of this pranic vehicle. Certain facts need emphasis and consideration as we study  this static ring and its circulating fires. Let me briefly recapitulate for the sake of clarity:
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
The System receives prana from cosmic sources via three centres, and redistributes it to all parts of its extended influence, or to the bounds of the solar etheric web. This cosmic prana becomes colored by solar quality and reaches the furthest confines of the system. Its mission might be described as the vitalisation of the vehicle which is the physical material expression of the solar Logos. 
The Planet receives prana from the solar centre, and redistributes it via the three receiving centres to all parts of its sphere of influence. This solar prana becomes colored by the planetary quality and is absorbed by all evolutions found within the planetary ring-pass-not. Its mission might be described as the vitalisation of the vehicle which is the physical material expression of one or other of the seven  Heavenly Men. 
The Microcosm receives prana from the sun after it has permeated the planetary etheric vehicle, so that it is solar prana, plus planetary quality. Each planet is the embodiment of some one ray aspect, and its quality is marked predominantly on all its evolution. 
Prana, therefore, which is active radiatory heat, varies in vibration and quality according to the receiving Entity. Man passes the prana through his etheric vehicle, colors it with his own peculiar quality, and so transmits it to the lesser lives that make up his little system. Thus, the great interaction  goes on, and all parts blend, merge and are interdependent; and all parts receive, color, qualify and transmit. An endless circulation goes on that has neither a conceivable beginning nor possible end  from the point of view of finite man, for its source and end are hid in the unknown cosmic fount. Were conditions everywhere perfected this circulation would proceed unimpeded and might result in a condition of almost endless duration, but limitation and termination result as the effects of imperfection  giving place to a gradual perfection. Every cycle originates from another cycle of a relative completeness, and will give place ever to a higher spiral; thus eventuate periods of apparent relative perfection leading to those which are still greater. 
The aim for this greater cycle is the blending, as we know, of the two fires of matter, latent and active, and their merging with the fires of mind and spirit till they are lost from sight in the general flame; the fires of mind and spirit burn up matter and thereby bring about liberation from the confining vehicles. The altar of earth is the birthplace of spirit, its liberator from the mother (matter), and its entrance into higher realms. 
Hence, when the pranic vehicle is working perfectly in all three groups, human, planetary and solar, the union with latent fire will be accomplished. Here lies the reason for the emphasis laid on the necessity  for building pure, refined physical vehicles. The more refined and rarefied the form, the better a receiver of prana will it be, and the less will be the resistance found to the uprising of kundalini at the appointed time. Coarse matter and crude immature physical bodies are a menace to the occultist, and  no true seer will be found with a body of a gross quality. The dangers of disruption are too great, and  the menace of disintegration by fire too awful. Once in the history of the race (in Lemurian days) this was seen in the destruction of the race and the continents by means of fire. 4645 The Guides of the race at that time availed Themselves of just this very thing to bring about the finish of an inadequate form. The latent fire of matter (as seen in volcanic display, for instance) and the radiatory fire of the system were combined. Planetary kundalini and solar emanation rushed into conjunction, and the work of destruction was accomplished. The same thing may again be seen, only in matter of the second ether, and the effects therefore will be less severe owing to the rarity of this ether and the comparatively  greater refinement of the vehicles.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
We might here note a fact of interest, though of a mystery insoluble as yet to most of us, and that is, that these destructions by fire are part of the tests by fire of an initiation of that one of the Heavenly  Men Whose karma is bound up with our earth. 
Each destruction of a portion of the web results in a greater facility of exit, and is in reality (when seen  from the higher planes) a step forward and an expansion. A repetition of this takes place likewise in  the system at the stated cycles. 
4. Disorders of the etheric body. 
We will now study the etheric body, and its ills and also its after death condition. This matter can be only briefly touched upon. All that may now be indicated is a general idea of the fundamental ailments to which the etheric may be subject, and the trend which applied medicine may later take when occult laws are better understood. One fact must here be brought out—a fact but little comprehended or even  apprehended. This is the significant fact that the ills of the etheric vehicle, in the case of the microcosm, will be found likewise in the Macrocosm. Herein lies the knowledge that ofttimes explains the apparent miseries of nature. Some of the great world evils have their source in etheric ills, extending the idea of the etheric to planetary conditions and even to solar. As we touch upon the causes of etheric distress in man, their planetary and solar correspondences and reactions may perhaps be realised. We will need to bear carefully in mind when studying this matter, that all the diseases of the etheric body will appertain to its threefold purpose and be either: 
a. Functional and thereby affecting its apprehension of prana, 
b. Organic, and thereby affecting its distribution of prana, 
c. Static, and thereby affecting the web, when viewed solely from the angle of providing a physical ring-pass-not, and acting as a separator between the physical and the astral. 
These three different groups of functions or purposes are each of paramount interest, lead to totally  different results, and react in a different manner both outwardly and inwardly. 
Viewed from the planetary standpoint the same conditions will be perceived, and the etheric planetary  body (which is fundamentally the body in the case of the sacred planets, of which the Earth is not one) will have its functional disorders, which will affect its reception of prana, will suffer its organic troubles which may affect its distribution, and those disorders which permit of trouble in the etheric web, which forms the ring-pass-not for the involved planetary Spirit. Here I would point out that in the case of the planetary Spirits Who are on the divine evolutionary arc, the Heavenly Men Whose bodies are planets, the etheric web does not form a barrier, but (like the Karmic Lords on a higher plane) They  have freedom of movement outside the bounds of the planetary web within the circumference of the solar ring-pass-not. 47 Heavenly Men. He is on the evolutionary arc of the universe, and has passed  many stages beyond the human. 
The planetary Entity is on the involutionary arc and is a very low grade Entity. He is the sum total of all the elemental lives of the planet.46 
Again from the systemic standpoint, these same effects may be observed, functionally, this time in  connection with the cosmic centre; organically, in connection with the sum total of the planetary systems; and statically, in connection with the solar or logoic ring-pass-not.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
We might now, for purposes of clarity, take up these three groups separately and briefly touch upon  them and hint (for more will not be possible) at methods of cure and of adjustment. 
a. Microcosmic functional disorders. These have to do with the reception by man, via the necessary  centres, of the pranic fluids. We must always bear in mind, and thus keep the distinction clear, that these emanations of prana have to do with the heat latent in matter; when received and functioning  through the etheric body correctly, they co-operate with the natural latent bodily warmth, and (merging  therewith) hold the body in a vitalised condition, imposing upon the matter of the body a certain rate of vibratory action that leads to the necessary activity of the physical vehicle, and the right functioning of its organs. It will, therefore, be apparent that the A. B. C. of bodily health is wrapped up in the right reception of prana, and that one of the basic changes that must be made in the life of the human animal (which is the aspect we are dealing with now) will be in the ordinary conditions of living. 
The three fundamental centres whereby reception is brought about must be allowed to function with  greater freedom, and with less restriction. Now, owing to centuries of wrong living, and to basic mistakes (originating in Lemurian days) man's three pranic centres are not in good working order. The centre between the shoulder blades is in the best receptive condition, though owing to the poor condition of the spinal column (which in so many is out of accurate alignment), its position in the back  is apt to be misplaced. The splenic centre near the diaphragm is sub-normal in size and its vibration is not correct. In the case of the aboriginal dwellers in such localities as the South Seas, better etheric conditions will be found; the life they lead is more normal (from the animal standpoint) than in any  other portion of the world. 
The race suffers from certain incapacities, which may be described as follows: 
First. Inability to tap pranic currents, owing to the unhealthy lives passed by so many. This involves the cutting off of the source of supply, and the consequent atrophying and shrinkage of the receptive centres. This is seen in an exaggerated form in the children of the congested quarters of any great city, and in the vitiated anemic dwellers of the slums. The cure is apparent—the bringing about of better living conditions, the employment of more appropriate clothing, and the adoption of a freer and more salubrious mode of living. When the pranic rays can find free access to the shoulders, and to the diaphragm, the subnormal state of the average spleen will adjust itself automatically. 
Second. Over-ability to tap pranic currents. The first type of functional disorder is common and  widespread. Its reverse can be found where conditions of life are such that the centres (through too  direct and prolonged submittal to solar emanation) become overdeveloped, vibrate too rapidly, and  receive prana in too great an amount. This is rarer, but is found in some tropical countries, and is responsible for much of the troublesome debility that attacks dwellers in these lands. The etheric body  receives prana or solar rays too rapidly, passes it through and out of the system with too much force, and this leaves the victim a prey to inertia and devitalisation. Putting it otherwise, the etheric body  becomes lazy, is like an unstrung web, or (to use a very homely illustration) it resembles a tennis racket which has become too soft, and has lost its resilience. The inner triangle transmits the pranic emanations with too great rapidity, giving no time for the subsidiary absorption, and the whole system is thereby the loser. Later it will be found that many of the ills that Europeans, living in India, fall heir to, originate in this way; and by attention, therefore, to the spleen, and by wise control of living  conditions, some of the trouble may be obviated. 
In touching upon similar conditions in the planet, both these types of trouble will be found. More
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
cannot be said, but in the wise study of solar radiation upon the surface of the planet in connection with  its rotary action, some of the group rules of health may be comprehended and followed. The spirit of the planet (or the planetary entity) likewise has his cycles, and in the absorption of planetary prana, and  in its correct distribution, lies the secret of fertility and equable vegetation. Much of this is hidden in the fabled story of the war between fire and water, which has its basis in the reaction of the fire latent in  matter, to the fire emanating outside of matter, and playing upon it. In the interval that has to elapse while the two are in process of blending, come those periods where, through karmic inheritance, reception is unstable and distribution inequable. As the point of race equilibrium is reached, so  planetary equilibrium will likewise be attained, and in planetary attainment will come the equilibrium that must mutually take place between the solar planets. When they attain a mutual balance and  interaction then the system is stabilised and perfection reached. The even distribution of prana will parallel this balancing in the man, in the race, in the planet and in the system. This is but another way  of saying that uniform vibration will be achieved. 
b. Microcosmic organic disorders. These are basically two in number: 
Troubles due to congestion. 
Destruction of tissue due to over-absorption of prana, or its too rapid blending with latent physical fire. 
We have a curious illustration of both of these forms of trouble in sun stroke and in heat stroke. Though supposedly understood by physicians, they are nevertheless altogether etheric disorders. When  the nature of the etheric body is better understood, and its wise care followed both these types of disease will be prevented. They are due to solar pranic emanation; in one case the effect of the emanation is to bring about death or serious illness through the congestion of an etheric channel, while in the other the same result is brought about by destruction of etheric matter. 
The above illustration has been used with definite intent, but it should be pointed out that etheric congestion may lead to many forms of disease and of mental incompetence. Etheric congestion leads to the thickening of the web to an abnormal extent, and this thickening may prevent, for instance, contact with the higher Self or principles and its resultants, idiocy and mental unbalance. It may lead to  abnormal fleshy development, to the thickening of some internal organ, and consequent undue pressure; one portion of the etheric body being congested may lead to the entire physical condition being upset, resulting in diverse complaints. 
Destruction of tissue may lead to insanity of many kinds, especially those kinds deemed incurable. The burning of the web may let in extraneous astral currents against which man is helpless; the brain tissue may be literally destroyed by this pressure, and serious trouble be caused through the etheric ring-pass not having been destroyed in some one place. 
In connection with the planet a similar state of affairs may be found. Later information may be forthcoming, which is at present withheld; this will show that whole races have been influenced, and certain kingdoms of nature troubled by planetary etheric congestion, or the destruction of planetary  etheric tissue. 
We have dealt with the functional and organic ills of the etheric, giving certain indications for the extension of the concept to other realms than the purely human. In the human kingdom lies the key, but the turning of that key opens up a door to a wider interpretation as it admits one into the mysteries of nature. Though that key has to be turned seven times, yet even one turn reveals untold avenues of
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
eventual comprehension.48The keys to the Secret Doctrine, by H. P. Blavatsky. See S. D., I, 343; note; II, 551. 
1. Every symbol and allegory has seven keys.—S. D., II, 567; III, 3. 
2. Only three keys available in the nineteenth century.—S. D., II, 543. Compare II, 617, 842. 3. There are seven keys to the Entrance door to the Mysteries.—S. D., III, 178. Compare I, 346; II, 330; II, 668, II, 731. 
4. The keys, as hinted by H. P. B., are: 
a. Psychological.—S. D., II, 25, note; I, 389. 
b. Astronomical.—S. D., II, 25, note; I, 389; III, 198. 
c. Physical or physiological.—S. D., II, 25, note; III, 198. 
d. Metaphysical.—S. D., II, 25, note; II, 394. 
e. Anthropological.—S. D., I, 389; III, 198. 
f. Astrological.—S. D., II, 343. 
g. Geometrical.—S. D., II, 494; III, 176. 
h. Mystical.—S. D., I, 401. 
i. Symbolical.—S. D., II, 561. 
j. Numerical.—S. D., II, 198. 
5. Each key must be turned seven times.—S. D., I, 22. 
6. The Jews availed themselves of two keys out of the seven. 
7. The Metaphysical key is available.—S. D., I, 338. Compare III, 198.47, 4948 
We have considered the reception and distribution of pranic emanations in man, the planet, and the system, and have seen what produces temporary disorders, and the devitalisation or the over vitalisation of the organic form. Now we can look at the subject from a third angle and therefore study: 
c. Microcosmic static disorders, or a consideration of the etheric body in connection with its work of providing a ring-pass-not from the purely physical to the astral. As has been said, both here and in the books of H. P. B., the ring-pass-not 50Ring-pass-not. The circumference of the sphere of influence of 
any centre of positive life. This includes the fire sphere of magnetic work of the solar orb, viewing it as the body of manifestation of a solar Logos and inclusive of an entire solar system. This term is also  applied to the sphere of activity of a planetary Logos or to a planetary scheme and could equally well be applied to the sphere of activity of the human Ego."—S. D., I, 346.48a is that confining barrier which acts as a separator or a division between a system and that which is external to that system. This, as may well be seen, has its interesting correlations when the subject is viewed (as we must consistently endeavour to view it) from the point of view of a human being, a planet and a system, remembering always that in dealing with the etheric body we are dealing with physical matter. This must ever be borne carefully in mind. Therefore, one paramount factor will be found in all groups and  formations, and this is the fact that the ring-pass-not acts only as a hindrance to that which is of small attainment in evolution, but forms no barrier to the more progressed. The whole question depends upon two things, which are the karma of the man, the planetary Logos, and the solar Logos, and the dominance of the spiritual indwelling entity over its vehicle. 
IV. MACROCOSMIC AND MICROCOSMIC ETHERS 
1. The Planetary Logos and the Ethers 
Man, the indwelling thinker, passes at night from out of his etheric ring-pass-not and functions elsewhere. Therefore, under the law, the planetary Logos likewise can pass His ring-pass-not at stated 
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
seasons which correspond in the planet to the hours of man's temporary repose, or pralaya. 
The solar Logos likewise does the same during stated cycles, which are not the cycles succeeding those which we term solar pralaya, but lesser cycles succeeding the 'days of Brahma' or periods of lesser activity, periodically viewed. All these are governed by karma, and just as the true Man himself applies the law of karma to his vehicles, and in his tiny system is the correspondence to that fourth  group of karmic entities whom we call the Lipika Lords; He applies the law to his threefold lower nature. The fourth group of extra-cosmic Entities Who have Their place subsidiary to the three cosmic Logoi Who are the threefold sumtotal of the logoic nature, can pass the bounds of the solar ring-pass not in Their stated cycles. This is a profound mystery and its complexity is increased by the recollection that the fourth Creative Hierarchy of human Monads, and the Lipika Lords in Their three groups (the first group, the second, and the four Maharajahs, making the totality of the threefold karmic rulers who stand between the solar Logos and the seven planetary Logoi), are more closely allied than the other Hierarchies, and their destinies are intimately interwoven. 
A further link in this chain which is offered for consideration lies in the fact that the four rays of mind  (which concern the karma of the four planetary Logoi) in their totality hold in their keeping the present evolutionary process for Man, viewing him as the Thinker. These four, with the karmic four, work in  the closest co-operation. Therefore, we have the following groups interacting: 
First. The four Maharajahs, the lesser Lipika Lords, 5149 who apply past karma and work it out in the present. 
Second. The four Lipikas of the second group, referred to by H. P. B. as occupied in applying future karma, and wielding the future destiny of the races. The work of the first group of four cosmic Lipika Lords is occult and is only revealed somewhat at the fourth Initiation (and even then but slightly) so it will not be touched upon here. 
Third. The fourth Creative Hierarchy of human Monads, held by a fourfold karmic law under the guidance of the Lipikas. 
Fourth. The four planetary Logoi 5250 of Harmony, Knowledge, Abstract Thought and Ceremonial, who are in Their totality the Quaternary of Manas while in process of evolution, and who pass under Their influence all the sons of men. 
Fifth. The Deva Lords of the four planes of Buddhi, or the plane of spiritual Intuition, Manas, or the mental plane, Desire, and the Physical, who are likewise allied to the human evolution in a cIoser sense than the higher three. 
A further interesting correspondence is found in the following facts that are even now in process of development: 
The fourth plane of Buddhi is the one on which the planetary Logoi begin to make Their escape from Their planetary ring-pass-not, or from the etheric web that has its counterpart on all the planes. 
When man begins in a small sense to co-ordinate the buddhic vehicle or, to express it otherwise, when  he has developed the power to contact ever so slightly the buddhic plane, then he begins simultaneously and consciously to achieve the ability to escape from the etheric web on the physical plane. Later he escapes from its correspondence on the astral plane, and finally from the correspondence on the fourth subplane of the mental plane this time via the mental unit. This leads eventually to causal functioning, or to the ability to dwell, and to be active in, the vehicle of the Ego, who is the embodiment of the love and wisdom aspect of the Monad. Note here the correspondence to 
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
that proved fact, that many can even now escape from the etheric body, and function in their astral sheath, which is the personality reflection of that same second aspect. 
When a man takes the fourth Initiation, he functions in the fourth plane vehicle, the buddhic, and has escaped permanently from the personality ring-pass-not, on the fourth subplane of the mental. There is naught to hold him to the three worlds. At the first Initiation he escapes from the ring-pass-not in a more temporary sense, but he has yet to escape from the three higher mental levels, which are the mental correspondences to the higher ethers, and to develop full consciousness on these three higher subplanes. We have here a correspondence to the work to be done by the initiate after he has achieved  the fourth solar plane, the buddhic. There yet remains the development of full consciousness on the three higher planes of spirit before he can escape from the solar ring-pass-not, which is achieved at the seventh Initiation, taken somewhere in the system, or in its cosmic correspondence reached by the cosmic sutratma, or cosmic thread of life 5351 
This fourth earth chain is in this connection one of the most important, for it is the appointed place for the domination of the etheric body by the human monad, with the aim in view of both human and planetary escape from limitations. This earth chain, though not one of the seven sacred planetary  chains, is of vital importance at this time to the planetary Logos, who temporarily employs it as a medium of incarnation, and of expression. This fourth round finds the solution of its strenuous and  chaotic life in the very simple fact of the shattering of the etheric web in order to effect liberation, and permit a later and more adequate form to be employed. 
A further chain of ideas may be followed up in the remembrance that the fourth ether is even now being studied and developed by the average scientist, and is already somewhat harnessed to the service of man; that the fourth subplane of the astral plane is the normal functioning ground of the average man  and that in this round escape from the etheric vehicle is being achieved; that the fourth subplane of the mental plane is the present goal of endeavor of one-fourth of the human family; that the fourth manvantara will see the solar ring-pass-not offering avenues of escape to those who have reached the necessary point; that the four planetary Logoi will perfect Their escape from Their planetary  environment, and will function with greater ease on the cosmic astral plane, paralleling on cosmic levels the achievement of the human units who are the cells in Their bodies. 
Our solar Logos, being a Logos of the fourth order, will begin to co-ordinate His cosmic buddhic body, and as He develops cosmic mind He will gradually achieve, by the aid of that mind, the ability to touch  the cosmic buddhic plane. 
These possibilities and correspondences have been somewhat dwelt upon, as it is necessary for us to realise the work to be done in connection with the etheric web before we take up the matter of the various causes which may hinder the desired progress, and prevent the appointed escape and destined  liberation. Later we will take up the consideration of the etheric web, and its static condition. This will entail the recollection of two things: 
First, that this static condition is only so when viewed from the standpoint of man at the present time, and is only termed so in order to make plainer the changes that must be effected and the dangers that must be offset. Evolution moves so slowly from man's point of view that it seems to be almost stationary, especially where etheric evolution is concerned. 
Second, that we are only concerning ourselves with the physical etheric body and not with its
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
correspondences on all planes. This is because our system is on the cosmic etheric levels, and hence is of prime importance to us. 
2. Cosmic and Systemic Ethers 
For the sake of those who read this treatise, and because the sequential repetition of fact makes for clarity, let us here briefly tabulate certain fundamental hypotheses that have a definite bearing upon the matter in hand, and which may serve to clear up the present existing confusion concerning the matter of the solar system. Some of the facts stated are already well known, others are inferential, while some are the expression of old and true correspondences couched in a more modern form. 
a. The lowest cosmic plane is the cosmic physical, and it is the only one which the finite mind of man can in any way comprehend. 
b. This cosmic physical plane exists in matter differentiated into seven qualities, groups, grades, or vibrations. 
c. These seven differentiations are the seven major planes of our solar system. 
For purposes of clarity, we might here tabulate under the headings physical, systemic, and cosmic, so  that the relationship and the correspondences may be apparent, and the connection to that which is above, and to that which is below, or included, may be plainly seen. 
CHART III — THE SEVEN PLANES OF OUR SOLAR SYSTEM 
THE PLANES 
Physical Plane Systemic Planes Cosmic Planes 
1. Atomic plane------Divine. Adi. -------------- Atomic plane 
1st ether Primordial matter 1st ether 
2. Sub-atomic --------Monadic. Anupadaka --- Sub-atomic 
The Akasha 2nd ether 
3. Super-etheric------Spiritual. Atmic---------- 3rd ether 
Ether 
PLANE OF UNION OR AT-ONE-MENT 
4. Etheric -------------Intuitional. Buddhic ----- 4th Cosmic ether 
Ether 
THE LOWER THREE WORLDS 
5. Gaseous------------Mental. Fire -------------- Gaseous Sub-etheric 
6. Liquid--------------Astral. Emotional-------- Liquid 
7. Dense physical----Physical plane ------------ Dense physical
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
d. These major seven planes of our solar system being but the seven subplanes of the cosmic physical plane, we can consequently see the reason for the emphasis laid by H. P. B. 5452, 5553 upon the fact that matter and ether are synonymous terms and that this ether is found in some form or other on all the planes, and is but a gradation of cosmic atomic matter, called when undifferentiated mulaprakriti or primordial pre-genetic substance, and when differentiated by Fohat (or the energising Life, the third Logos or Brahma) it is termed prakriti, or matter. 56 Mulaprakriti. The Parabrahmic root, the abstract deific feminine principle—undifferentiated substance. Akasa. Literally, "the root of Nature" (Prakriti), or matter.54 
e. Our solar system is what is called a system of the fourth order; that is, it has its location on the fourth  cosmic etheric plane, counting, as always, from above downwards. 
f. Hence this fourth cosmic etheric plane forms the meeting ground for the past and the future, and is the present. 
g. Therefore, also, the buddhic or intuitional plane (the correspondence in the system of this fourth cosmic ether) is the meeting ground, or plane of union, for that which is man and for that which will be superman, and links the past with that which is to be. 
h. The following correspondences in time would repay careful meditation. They are based on a realisation of the relationship between this fourth cosmic ether, the buddhic plane, and the fourth physical etheric subplane. 
The fourth subplane of mind, the correspondence on the mental plane of the physical etheric, is likewise a point of transition from out of a lower into a higher, and is the transferring locality into a higher body. 
The fourth subplane of the monadic plane is in a very real sense the place of transition from off the egoic ray (whichever that ray may be) on to the monadic ray; these three major rays are organised on the three higher subplanes of the monadic plane in the same way that the three abstract subplanes of the mental are the group of transference from off the personality ray on to the egoic. 
The four lesser rays blend with the third major ray of active intelligence on the mental plane and on the atmic plane. The four Logoi or planetary Spirits work as one, on the atmic plane. 
i. Another synthesis takes place on the synthetic second ray on the second subplane of the buddhic plane and the monadic plane, while the comparatively few Monads of will or power are synthesised on  the atomic subplane of the atmic. All three groups of Monads work in triple form on the mental plane under the Mahachohan, the Manu, and the Bodhisattva, or the Christ; on the second or monadic plane they work as a unit, only demonstrating their dual work on the atmic plane, and their essential triplicity  on the buddhic plane. 57Mahachohan. The officer in our planetary Hierarchy who presides over the activities carried on in the four minor rays and their synthesising third ray. He has to do with civilisation, with the intellectual culture of the races, and with intelligent energy. He is the head of all the Adepts. 
Bodhisattva. The exponent of second ray force, the Teacher of the Adepts of men and of Angels. This office was originally held by the Buddha, but His place was taken (after His Illumination) by the
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
Christ. The work of the Bodhisattva is with the religions of the world, and with the spiritual Essence in  Man. 
The Manu. The One Who presides over the evolution of the races. He is the ideal man. He has to  work with the forms through which Spirit is to manifest; he destroys, and builds up again. These three Individuals preside over the three Departments into which the Hierarchy is divided, and therefore represent in their particular sphere the three Aspects of divine manifestation.55 
The fourth etheric plane holds the key to the dominance of matter, and it might be noted that: 
On the fourth physical ether man begins to co-ordinate his astral, or emotional body, and to escape at ever more frequent intervals into that vehicle. Continuity of consciousness is achieved when a man has mastered the four ethers. 
On the fourth subplane of the mental plane, man begins to control his causal or egoic body, and to  polarise his consciousness therein until the polarisation is complete. He functions then consciously on  it when he has mastered the correspondences to the ethers on the mental plane. 
On the buddhic plane (the fourth cosmic ether) the Heavenly Men (or the grouped consciousness of the human and deva Monads) begin to function, and to escape eventually from the cosmic etheric planes. When these three cosmic ethers are mastered, the functioning is perfected, polarisation is centred in the monadic vehicles, and the seven Heavenly Men have achieved Their goal. 
j. On these etheric levels, therefore, the Logos of our system repeats, as a grand totality, the experiences of His tiny reflections on the physical planes; He co-ordinates His cosmic astral body, and attains continuity of consciousness when He has mastered the three cosmic ethers. 
k. It is to be observed that just as in man the dense physical body in its three grades—dense, liquid and  gaseous—is not recognised as a principle, so in the cosmic sense the physical (dense) astral (liquid) and  mental (gaseous) levels are likewise regarded as non-existing, and the solar system has its location on  the fourth ether. The seven sacred planets are composed of matter of this fourth ether, and the seven  Heavenly Men, whose bodies they are, function normally on the fourth plane of the system, the buddhic or the fourth cosmic ether. When man has attained the consciousness of the buddhic plane, he has raised his consciousness to that of the Heavenly Man in whose body he is a cell. This is achieved at the fourth Initiation, the liberating initiation. At the fifth Initiation he ascends with the Heavenly  Man on to the fifth plane (from the human standpoint), the atmic, and at the sixth he has dominated the second cosmic ether and has monadic consciousness and continuity of function. At the seventh  Initiation he dominates the entire sphere of matter contained in the lowest cosmic plane, escapes from all etheric contact, and functions on the cosmic astral plane. 
The past solar system saw the surmounting of the three lowest cosmic physical planes viewed from the matter standpoint and the co-ordination of the dense threefold physical form in which all life is found, dense matter, liquid matter, gaseous matter. A correspondence may be seen here in the work achieved  in the first three rootraces. 58Rootrace. The Secret Doctrine teaches us that in this evolution or Round  
on this planet the Jivatma—the human soul—passes through seven main types or "rootraces." In the case of the two earliest of these, known as the "Adamic" and the "Hyperborean," the forms ensouled  were astral and etheric respectively: "huge and indefinite" they were with a low state or outward-going  consciousness exercised through the one sense (hearing) possessed by the first race, or through the two  senses (hearing and touch) possessed by the second. But with the third race the Lemurian, a denser and 
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
more human type was evolved, this being perfected in the fourth or Atlantean race. The fifth race, the Aryan, is now running its course on this globe concurrently with a large part of the fourth race and a few remnants of the third. For it must be noted that, although each race gives birth to the succeeding  race, the two will overlap in time, coexisting for many ages. Of existing peoples the Tartars, Chinese and Mongolians belong to the fourth race, the Australian aborigines and Hottentots to the third.56, 59 gathering in and of pralaya. In the earlier system the fourth aetheric was in this position; it was to the evolving units of that period what the atomic plane is now, the highest point of achievement. The goal for all was the buddhic plane or the fourth cosmic aether. Three other planes are the goal now,—the buddhic, atmic and monadic, each time three planes and their eventual synthesis. In the future solar system the cosmic physical atomic aether (the plane of Adi in the system now) will be the starting point and the three planes to be dominated will be the three lowest cosmic astral planes. Man starts in where he leaves off, with cosmic physical matter perfected. His lowest body, therefore, will be the monadic or the body of the second cosmic aether. This will not be then counted as a principle any more than the threefold lower physical body of present day man is recognised as a principle. 
The present solar system will see the surmounting of the three next cosmic physical planes, the fourth, third, and the second aethers, and the coordination of the cosmic etheric body.57 
3. The Protective Purpose of the Etheric Body. 
Now let us, after this somewhat lengthy digression, leave things cosmic and incomprehensible, and  come down to practical evolution, and to the study of the matter of man's etheric body, and of the harm that may ensue to him should that body (through the breaking of the law) no longer perform its protective function. Let us see first of all what those protective functions are: 
First. The etheric web acts as a separator or a dividing web between the astral and the dense physical body. 
Second. It circulates the inflowing vitality or pranic fluid and carries on its work in three stages. 
The first stage is that wherein the pranic fluid and solar radiations are received, and circulated three times around the triangle, thence being distributed to the periphery of the body, animating and  vitalising all the physical organs and conducing to the automatic subconscious workings of the body of dense matter. When perfectly accomplishing its object it protects from disease, and the ills of the flesh  are unknown to the man who absorbs and distributes prana with accuracy. This hint is recommended to  all physicians, and when properly comprehended, will result in a basic change in medicine, from a curative to a preventive foundation. 
The second stage is that in which the pranic fluids begin to blend with the fire at the base of the spine and to drive that fire slowly upwards, transferring its heat from the centres below the solar plexus to the three higher centres—that of the heart, the throat and the head. This is a long and slow process when left to the unaided force of nature, but it is just here that (in a few cases) a quickening of the process is permitted in order to equip workers in the field of human service. This is the object of all occult training. This angle of the matter we will take up in still greater detail when we handle our next point of "Kundalini and the Spine." 
The third stage is that in which active radiatory matter or prana is blended ever more perfectly with the fire latent in matter; this results (as will be brought out later) in certain effects.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
It produces a quickening of the normal vibration of the physical body so that it responds with more readiness to the higher note of the Ego, and causes a steady rising of the blending fires through the threefold channel in the spinal column. In the second stage this vitalising blended fire reaches a centre between the lower part of the shoulder blades, which is the point of conjunction, and of complete merging, of the fire from the base of the spine and the fire circulating along the pranic triangle. It will be remembered how one point of this triangle originates there. When the threefold basic fire and the threefold pranic fire meet and merge, then evolution proceeds with greatly increased velocity. This is effected definitely at the first Initiation when the polarisation becomes fixed in one or other of the three higher centres,—which centre being dependent upon a man's ray. 
The result of this merging leads to a change in the action of the centres. They become "wheels turning  upon themselves," and from a purely rotary movement become fourth dimensional in action, and  manifest as radiant whirling centres of living fire. 
The three major head centres (the sequence varying according to ray) become active and a similar process is effected between them as was effected in the pranic triangle. From being three centres that react faintly to each other's vibratory movement (feeling the warmth and rhythm of each other, yet separated), the fire leaps from centre to centre, and each whirling wheel becomes linked by a chain of fire till there is a triangle of fire through which the kundalini and pranic fires radiate back and forth. Circulation is also carried on. The fire of kundalini produces the heat of the centre, and its intense radiance and brilliance, while the pranic emanatory fire produces ever increasing activity and rotation. 
As time elapses between the first and fourth Initiation, the threefold channel in the spine, and the entire etheric body is gradually cleansed and purified by the action of the fire till all "dross" (as the Christian  expresses it) is burnt away, and naught remains to impede the progress of this flame. 
As the fire of kundalini and prana proceed with their work, and the channel becomes more and more cleared, the centres more active, and the body purer, the flame of spirit, or the fire from the Ego, comes more actively downwards till a flame of real brilliance issues from the top of the head. This flame surges upwards through the bodies towards its source, the causal body. 
Simultaneously with the activity of these fires of matter and of Spirit, the fires of mind, or manas, burn  with greater intensity. These are the fires given at individualisation. They are fed continuously by the fire of matter, and their heat is augmented by solar emanatory fire, which originates on the cosmic levels of mind. It is this aspect of the manasic fire that develops under the forms of instinct, animal memory, and functional recollection which are so apparent in the little evolved man. As time progresses the fire of mind burns more brightly and thus reaches a point where it begins to burn through the etheric web—that portion of the web that can be found guarding the centre at the very top  of the head, and admitting entrance to the downflow from the Spirit. By its means certain things are brought about: 
The kundalini fire is consciously directed and controlled by the mind or will aspect from the mental plane. The two fires of matter by the power of the mind of man are blended first with each other, and, secondly, with the fire of mind. 
The united result of this blending is the destruction (under rule and order), of the etheric web, and the consequent production of continuity of consciousness and the admission into the personal life of man of "Life more abundant," or the third fire of Spirit.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
The downrush of Spirit, and the uprising of the inner fires of matter (controlled and directed by the conscious action of the fire of mind) produce corresponding results on the same levels on the astral and  mental planes, so that a paralleling contact is brought about, and the great work of liberation proceeds in an ordered manner. 
The three first initiations see these results perfected, and lead to the fourth, where the intensity of the united fires results in the complete burning away of all barriers, and the liberation of the Spirit by conscious directed effort from out its threefold lower sheath. Man has consciously to bring about his own liberation. These results are self-induced by the man himself, as he is emancipated from the three worlds, and has broken the wheel of rebirth himself instead of being broken upon it. 
It will be apparent from this elucidation that the exceeding importance of the etheric vehicle as the separator of the fires has been brought forward, and consequently we have brought to our notice the dangers that must ensue should man tamper injudiciously, ignorantly or wilfully with these fires. 
Should a man, by the power of will or through an over-development of the mental side of his character, acquire the power to blend these fires of matter and to drive them forward, he stands in danger of obsession, insanity, physical death, or of dire disease in some part of his body, and he also runs the risk  of an over-development of the sex impulse through the driving of the force in an uneven manner upwards, or in forcing its radiation to undesirable centres. The reason of this is that the matter of his body is not pure enough to stand the uniting of the flames, that the channel up the spine is still clogged  and blocked, and therefore acts as a barrier, turning the flame backwards and downwards, and that the flame (being united by the power of mind and not being accompanied by a simultaneous downflow from the plane of spirit), permits the entrance, through the burning etheric, of undesirable and  extraneous forces, currents, and even entities. These wreck and tear and ruin what is left of the etheric vehicle, of the brain tissue and even of the dense physical body itself. 
The unwary man, being unaware of his Ray and therefore of the proper geometrical form of triangle that is the correct method of circulation from centre to centre, will drive the fire in unlawful progression and thus burn up tissue; this will result then (if in nothing worse), in a setting back for several lives of the clock of his progress, for he will have to spend much time in rebuilding where he destroyed, and with recapitulating on right lines all the work to be done. 
If a man persists from life to life in this line of action, if he neglects his spiritual development and  concentrates on intellectual effort turned to the manipulation of matter for selfish ends, if he continues this in spite of the promptings of his inner self, and in spite of the warnings that may reach him from Those who watch, and if this is carried on for a long period he may bring upon himself a destruction that is final for this manvantara or cycle. He may, by the uniting of the two fires of matter and the dual expression of mental fire, succeed in the complete destruction of the physical permanent atom, and  thereby sever his connection with the higher self for aeons of time. H. P. B. has somewhat touched on  this when speaking of "lost souls"; 60Isis Unveiled, Vol. II, p. 368; also S. D., I, 255, and S. D., III 493, 513-516, 521, 525, 527.58 6159 we must here emphasise the reality of this dire disaster and sound a warning note to those who approach this subject of the fires of matter with all its latent dangers. The blending of these fires must be the result of spiritualised knowledge, and must be directed solely by the Light of the Spirit, who works through love and is love, and who seeks this unification and this utter merging not from the point of view of sense or of material gratification, but because liberation and purification is desired in order that the higher union with the Logos may be effected; this union must be
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
desired, not for selfish ends, but because group perfection is the goal and scope for greater service to the race must be achieved. 
V. DEATH AND THE ETHERIC BODY 
It is not our purpose to give facts for verification by science, or even to point the way to the next step  onward for scientific investigators; that we may do so is but incidental and purely secondary. What we seek mainly is to give indications of the development and correspondence of the threefold whole that makes the solar system what it is—the vehicle through which a great cosmic ENTITY, the solar Logos, manifests active intelligence with the purpose in view of demonstrating perfectly the love side of His nature. Back of this design lies a yet more esoteric and ulterior purpose, hid in the Will Consciousness of the Supreme Being, which perforce will be later demonstrated when the present objective is attained. The dual alternation of objective manifestation and of subjective obscuration, the periodic out breathing, followed by the in-breathing of all that has been carried forward through evolution embodies in the system one of the basic cosmic vibrations, and the key-note of that cosmic ENTITY whose body  we are. The heart beats of the Logos (if it might be so inadequately expressed) are the source of all cyclic evolution, and hence the importance attached to that aspect of development called the "heart" or "love aspect," and the interest that is awakened by the study of rhythm. This is true, not only cosmically and macrocosmically, but likewise in the study of the human unit. Underlying all the physical sense attached to rhythm, vibration, cycles and heart-beat, lie their subjective analogies—love, feeling, emotion, desire, harmony, synthesis and ordered sequence,—and back of these analogies lies the source of all, the identity of that Supreme Being Who thus expresses Himself. 
Therefore, the study of pralaya, or the withdrawal of the life from out of the etheric vehicle will be the same whether one studies the withdrawal of the human etheric double, the withdrawal of the planetary  etheric double, or the withdrawal of the etheric double of the solar system. The effect is the same and  the consequences similar. 
What is the result of this withdrawal, or rather what causes that something which we call death or pralaya? As we are strictly pursuing the text-book style in this treatise, we will continue our methods of tabulation. The withdrawal of the etheric double of a man, a planet, and a system is brought about by the following causes: 
a. The cessation of desire. This should be the result of all evolutionary process. True death, under the law, is brought about by the attainment of the objective, and hence by the cessation of aspiration. This, as the perfected cycle draws to its close, will be true of the individual human being, of the Heavenly  Man, and of the Logos Himself. 
b. By the slowing down and gradual cessation of the cyclic rhythm, the adequate vibration is achieved, and the work accomplished. When the vibration or note is perfectly felt or sounded it causes (at the point of synthesis with other vibrations) the utter shattering of the forms. 
Motion is characterised, as we know, by three qualities: 
1. Inertia, 
2. Mobility, 
3. Rhythm.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
These three are experienced in just the above sequence and presuppose a period of slow activity, succeeded by one of extreme movement. This middle period produces incidentally (as the true note and rate is sought) cycles of chaos, of experiment, of experience and of comprehension. Following on  these two degrees of motion (which are characteristic of the atom, Man, of the Heavenly Man or group, and of the Logos or the Totality) comes a period of rhythm and of stabilisation wherein the point of balance is achieved. By the force of balancing the pairs of opposites, and thus producing equilibrium, pralaya is the inevitable sequence. 
c. By the severing of the physical from the subtler body on the inner planes, through the shattering of the web. This has a threefold effect: 
First. The life that had animated the physical form (both dense and etheric) and which had its starting point in the permanent atom and from thence "pervaded the moving and the unmoving" (in God, the Heavenly Man, and the human being, as well as in the atom of matter) is withdrawn entirely within the atom upon the plane of abstraction. This "plane of abstraction" is a different one for the entities involved: 
a. For the physical permanent atom, it is the atomic level. 
b. For man, it is the causal vehicle. 
c. For the Heavenly Man, it is the second plane of monadic life, His habitat. 
d. For the Logos, it is the plane of Adi. 
All these mark the points for the disappearance of the unit into pralaya. We need here to remember that it is always pralaya when viewed from below. From the higher vision, that sees the subtler continuously overshadowing the dense when not in objective manifestation, pralaya is simply subjectivity, and is not that "which is not," but simply that which is esoteric. 
Second. The etheric double of a man, a planetary Logos, and a solar Logos, being shattered, becomes nonpolarised as regards its indweller, and permits therefore of escape. It is (to word it otherwise) no longer a source of attraction, nor a focal magnetic point. It becomes non-magnetic, and the great Law of Attraction ceases to control it; hence disintegration is the ensuing condition of the form. The Ego  ceases to be attracted by its form on the physical plane, and, proceeding to inbreathe, withdraws its life from out of the sheath. The cycle draws to a close, the experiment has been made, the objective (a relative one from life to life and from incarnation to incarnation) has been achieved, and there remains nothing more to desire; the Ego, or the thinking entity, loses interest therefore in the form, and turns his attention inward. His polarisation changes, and the physical is eventually dropped. 
The planetary Logos likewise in His greater cycle (the synthesis or the aggregate of the tiny cycles of the cells of His body) pursues the same course; He ceases to be attracted downward or outward, and turns His gaze within; He gathers inward the aggregate of the smaller lives within His body, the planet, and severs connection. Outer attraction ceases and all gravitates towards the centre instead of scattering to the periphery of His body. 
In the system, the same process is followed by the solar Logos; from His high place of abstraction, He ceases to be attracted by His body of manifestation. He withdraws His interest and the two pairs of opposites, the spirit and the matter of the vehicle, dissociate. With this dissociation the solar system, that "Son of Necessity," or of desire, ceases to be, and passes out of objective existence.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
Third. This leads finally, to the scattering of the atoms of the etheric body into their primordial condition. The subjective life, the synthesis of will and love taking active form, is withdrawn. The partnership is dissolved. The form then breaks up; the magnetism that has held it in coherent shape is no longer present, and dissipation is complete. Matter persists, but the form no longer persists. 
The work of the second Logos ends, and the divine incarnation of the Son is concluded. But the faculty  or inherent quality of matter also persists, and at the end of each period of manifestation, matter (though distributed again into its primal form) is active intelligent matter plus the gain of objectivity, and the increased radiatory and latent activity which it has gained through experience. Let us illustrate: The matter of the solar system, when undifferentiated, was active intelligent matter, and that is all that can be predicated of it. This active intelligent matter was matter qualified by an earlier experience, and  coloured by an earlier incarnation. Now this matter is in form, the solar system is not in pralaya but in  objectivity,—his objectivity having in view the addition of another quality to the logoic content, that of love and wisdom. Therefore at the next solar pralaya, at the close of the one hundred years of Brahma, the matter of the solar system will be coloured by active intelligence, and by active love. This means literally that the aggregate of solar atomic matter will eventually vibrate to another key than it did at the first dawn of manifestation. 
We can work this out in connection with the planetary Logos and the human unit, for the analogy holds good. We have a correspondence on a tiny scale in the fact that each human life period sees a man  taking a more evolved physical body of a greater responsiveness, tuned to a higher key, of more adequate refinement, and vibrating to a different measure. In these three thoughts lies much  information, if they are carefully studied and logically extended. 
d. By the transmutation of the violet into the blue. This we cannot enlarge on. We simply make the statement, and leave its working out to those students whose karma permits and whose intuition  suffices. 
e. By the withdrawal of the life, the form should gradually dissipate. The reflex action here is interesting to note, for the greater Builders and Devas who are the active agents during manifestation, and who hold the form in coherent shape, transmuting, applying and circulating the pranic emanations, likewise lose their attraction to the matter of the form, and turn their attention elsewhere. On the path of out-breathing (whether human, planetary or logoic) these building devas (on the same Ray as the unit desiring manifestation, or on a complementary Ray) are attracted by his will and desire, and  perform their office of construction. On the path of in-breathing (whether human, planetary or logoic) they are no longer attracted, and the form begins to dissipate. They withdraw their interest and the forces (likewise entities) who are the agents of destruction, carry on their necessary work of breaking up the form; they scatter it—as it is occultly expressed—to "The four winds of Heaven," or to the regions of the four breaths,—a fourfold separation and distribution. A hint is here given for careful consideration. 
Though no pictures have been drawn of death bed scenes nor of the dramatic escape of the palpitating  etheric body from the centre in the head, as might have been anticipated, yet some of the rules and  purposes governing this withdrawal have been mentioned. We have seen how the aim of each life (whether human, planetary or solar) should be the effecting and the carrying out of a definite purpose. This purpose is the development of a more adequate form for the use of the spirit; and when this purpose is achieved then the Indweller turns his attention away, and the form disintegrates, having served his need. This is not always the case in every human life nor even in each planetary cycle. The
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
mystery of the moon is the mystery of failure. This leads, when comprehended, to a life of dignity and  offers an aim worthy of our best endeavour. When this angle of truth is universally recognised, as it will be when the intelligence of the race suffices, then evolution will proceed with certainty, and the failures be less numerous. 
DIVISION D - KUNDALINI AND THE SPINE 
KUNDALINI 62Kundalini, the serpent power or mystic fire; it is called the serpentine or annular power on account of its spiral-like working or progress in the body of the ascetic developing the power in  himself. It is an electric fiery occult, or fohatic power, the great pristine force which underlies all organic and inorganic matter."—H. P. Blavatsky.60, 63at rest—that is, in the form of static potential energy....Kundalini shakti in individual bodies is power at rest, or the static centre round which every form of existence, as moving power, revolves."..—The Serpent Power, by Arthur Avalon.61 AND THE SPINE 
I. Kundalini and the three triangles. 
1. In the head. 
2. In the body. 
3. At the base of the spine. 
II. The arousing of Kundalini. 
Very briefly, owing to the impossibility of revealing much on this necessarily dangerous subject, we will consider the subject of kundalini and the spine. 
We must remember here that we are dealing with the etheric counterpart of the spine, and not with the bony structure which we call the spine or spinal column. This is a fact not sufficiently recognised by  those who treat of the matter. Too much emphasis has been laid on the three spinal channels that compose the threefold spinal cord. 
These channels are important in connection with the nervous system of the man, but in relation to the matter in hand, they are not primarily so important as the etheric channel, which is the unit enclosing  these three. Therefore, we must strictly remember that we are dealing with 
a. The etheric channel, 
b. The fire that passes up the channel, 
c. The conjunction of this fire with the radiatory energising fire of the physical body at the point between the shoulder blades, 
d. Their united ascension into the head, 
e. Their blending eventually with the manasic fire which energises the three head centres. I. KUNDALINI AND THE THREE TRIANGLES 
The fire energising the triangle in the head is the higher correspondence to the triangle of prana, midway in the body, and its lower reflection at the base of the spine. We have, therefore, in the human  unit three important triangles:
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
1. In the head: The triangle of the three major centres, 
a. The pineal gland, 
b. The pituitary body, 
c. The alta major centre. 
2. In the body: The triangle of prana, 
a. Between the shoulders, 
b. Above the diaphragm, 
c. The spleen. 
3. At the base of the spine: The three lower centres, 
a. A point at the bottom of the spinal column. 
b. and c. The two major sex organs in the male and female. 64attention to the two higher triangles comes the redemption of man.62 
The merging of the fires of matter and the fires of mind results in the energising of the sumtotal of the atoms of the matter of the body. This is the secret of the immense staying power of the great thinkers and workers of the race. It results also in a tremendous stimulation of the three higher centres in the body, the head, the heart, the throat and in the electrification of this area of the body. These higher centres then form a field of attraction for the downflow of the third fire, that of Spirit. The many petalled head centre at the top of the head becomes exceedingly active. It is the synthetic head centre, and the sumtotal of all the other centres. The stimulation of the centres throughout the body is paralleled or duplicated by the concurrent vivification of the many-petalled lotus. It is the meeting place of the three fires, those of the body, of the mind, and of the Spirit. The at-one-ment with the Ego  is completed when it is fully stimulated, and combustion then ensues; this is duplicated in the subtler vehicles and causes the final consummation and the liberation of Spirit. 
The merging of the fires of matter is the result of evolutionary growth, when left to the normal, slow development that time alone can bring. The junction of the two fires of matter is effected early in the history of man, and is the cause of the rude health that the clean-living, high-thinking man should  normally enjoy. When the fires of matter have passed (united) still further along the etheric spinal channel they contact the fire of manas as it radiates from the throat centre. Clarity of thought is here essential, and it will be necessary to elucidate somewhat this rather abstruse subject. 
1. The three major head centres (from the physical standpoint) are the: 
a. Alta centre, 
b. Pineal gland, 
c. Pituitary body. 
2. They form a manasic triangle, after their juncture with the two fires of the two lower triangles, i.e., when they become synthetic. 
3. But the purely manasic triangle prior to this merging is, 
a. The throat centre, 
b. The pineal gland, 
c. Pituitary body. 
This is during the period when the human unit consciously aspires and throws his will on the side of evolution, thus making his life constructive. 
The other fire of matter (the dual fire) is attracted upward, and merges with the fire of mind through a junction effected at the alta major centre. This centre is situated at the base of the skull, and there is a
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
slight gap between this centre and the point at which the fires of matter issue from the spinal channel. Part of the work the man who is developing thought power has to do, is to build a temporary channel in  etheric matter to bridge the gap. This channel is the reflection in physical matter of the antaskarana 65—Voice of the Silence, page 71. 
"The antaskarana is the imaginary path between the personal and the impersonal self, and is the highway of sensation; it is the battlefield for mastery over the personal self. It is the path of aspiration, and where one longing for goodness exists the antaskarana persists."—See Voice of the Silence, pp. 50, 55, 56, 88.63 that the Ego has to build in order to bridge the gap between the lower and higher mental, between the causal vehicle on the third subplane of the mental plane, and the manasic permanent atom on the first subplane. This is the work that all advanced thinkers are unconsciously doing now. When  the gap is completely bridged, man's body becomes co-ordinated with the mental body and the fires of mind and of matter are blended. It completes the perfecting of the personality life, and as earlier said, this perfecting brings a man to the portal of initiation—initiation being the seal set upon accomplished  work; it marks the end of one lesser cycle of development, and the beginning of the transference of the whole work to a still higher spiral. 
We must always bear in mind that the fires from the base of the spine and the splenic triangle are fires of matter. We must not lose this recollection nor get confused. They have no spiritual effect, and  concern themselves solely with the matter in which the centres of force are located. These centres of force are always directed by manas or mind, or by the conscious effort of the indwelling entity; but that entity is held back in the effects he seeks to achieve until the vehicles through which he is seeking  expression, and their directing, energising centres, make adequate response. Hence it is only in due course of evolution, and when the matter of these vehicles is energised sufficiently by its own latent fires that he can accomplish his long-held purpose. Hence again the need of the ascension of the fire of matter to its own place, and its resurrection from its long burial and seeming prostitution before it can be united with its Father in Heaven, the third Logos, Who is the Intelligence of matter itself. The correspondence, again, holds good. Even the atom of the physical plane has its goal, its initiations and  its ultimate triumph. 
Other angles of this subject, such as the centres and their relationship to manas, the fire of Spirit and  manas, and the eventual blending of the three fires, will be dealt with in our next two main divisions. In this division we are confining ourselves to the study of matter and fire, and must not digress, or confusion will ensue. 
II. THE AROUSING OF KUNDALINI 
How this fire at the base of the spine can be aroused, the form its progression should take (dependent upon the Ray), the blending of the fire with pranic fire and their subsequent united progression, are things of the past with many, and fortunately for the race, the work was achieved without conscious effort. The second blending with the fire of manas has to be effected. Scarcely as yet have men  succeeded in directing the fire up more than one channel of the threefold column; hence two-thirds of its effect in the majority is yet confined to the stimulation of the organs of race propagation. Only when the fire has circled unimpeded up another channel is the complete merging with the fire of manas effected, and only when it progresses geometrically up all the three—with simultaneous action and at uniform vibration—is the true kundalini fire fully aroused, and therefore able to perform its work of cleansing through the burning of the confining web and of the separating particles. When this is accomplished the threefold channel becomes one channel. Hence the danger.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
No more can be imparted concerning this subject. He who directs his efforts to the control of the fires of matter, is (with a dangerous certainty) playing with a fire that may literally destroy him. He should  not cast his eyes backwards, but should lift them to the plane where dwells his immortal Spirit, and  then by self-discipline, mind-control and a definite refining of his material bodies, whether subtle or physical, fit himself to be a vehicle for the divine birth, and participate in the first Initiation. When the Christ-child (as the Christian so beautifully expresses it) has been born in the cave of the heart, then  that divine guest can consciously control the lower material bodies by means of consecrated mind. Only when buddhi has assumed an ever-increasing control of the personality, via the mental plane (hence the need of building the antaskarana), will the personality respond to that which is above, and the lower fires mount and blend with the two higher. Only when Spirit, by the power of thought, controls the material vehicles, does the subjective life assume its rightful place, does the God within shine and blaze forth till the form is lost from sight, and "The path of the just shine ever more and more until the day be with us." 
DIVISION E - MOTION ON THE PHYSICAL AND ASTRAL PLANES 
I. Preliminary remarks. 
1. The threefold goal. 
2. The threefold function. 
3. The threefold mode of activity. 
II. The effects of rotary motion. 
1. Separation. 
2. Momentum. 
3. Friction. 
4. Absorption. 
III. The qualities of rotary motion. 
1. Inertia. 
2. Mobility. 
3. Rhythm. 
IV. Rotary motion and symbolism. 
V. Motion and the centres. 
1. The nature of the centres. 
2. The centres and the rays. 
3. The centres and kundalini. 
4. The centres and the senses. 
5. The centres and initiation. 
I. PRELIMINARY REMARKS 
I would point out primarily and emphasize the fact that the motion we are considering is that due to the fire latent in matter itself, a motion that is the prime characteristic and basic quality of the Primordial Ray of Active Intelligence. To express it otherwise: it is the outstanding faculty of the third Logos, of Brahma viewed as the Creator, and this faculty is the product or result of an earlier manifestation. Each  of the three Logoi, when in manifestation and thus personified, is exemplifying some one quality which  predominates over the others. Each, more or less, exemplifies all, but each demonstrates one of the three aspects so profoundly as to be recognised as that aspect itself. In much the same way, for
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
instance, the different incarnating jivas carry a vibration which is their main measure, though they may  also have lesser vibrations that are subsidiary to them. Let us get this clear, for the truth embodied is fundamental. 
1. The threefold goal, 
2. The threefold function, 
3. The threefold mode of activity. 
The Third Logos. The third Logos, or Brahma, is characterised by active intelligence; His mode of action is that which we call rotary, or that measured revolution of the matter of the system, first as a grand totality, setting in movement the material circumscribed by the entire ring-pass-not, and secondly  differentiating it, according to seven vibratory rates or measures into the seven planes. On each of these planes the process is pursued, and the matter of any plane within the plane ring-pass-not shows first as a totality and then as a sevenfold differentiation. This differentiation of matter is brought about by rotary motion, and is controlled by the Law of Economy (one of the cosmic laws) with which we will deal later, only pausing here to say that this Law of Economy might be considered as the controlling factor in the life of the third Logos. Therefore: 
a. His goal is the perfect blending of Spirit and matter. 
b. His function is the manipulation of prakriti, or matter, so as to make it fit, or equal to, the demands and needs of the Spirit. 
c. His mode of action is rotary, or, by the revolution of matter, to increase activity and thereby make the material more pliable. 
All these three concepts are governed by the Law of Economy, which is the Law of Adaptation in time and space, or the line of least resistance. This line of least resistance is that which is sought for and  followed on the matter side of existence. Incidentally, Brahma manifests Will, because He is purpose, and Love because in this solar system Love is the line of least resistance. While this is an occult statement worthy of consideration, yet it must be remembered that He is primarily activity and intelligence with the aim of adaptability, and that this is His main characteristic. 
The Second Logos. The second Logos, Vishnu, the divine Wisdom Ray, the great principle of Buddhi seeking to blend with the principle of Intelligence, is characterised by Love. His motion is that which we might term spiral cyclic. Availing Himself of the rotary motion of all atoms, He adds to that His own form of motion or of spiralling periodical movement, and by circulation along an orbit or spheroidal path (which circles around a central focal point in an ever ascending spiral) two results are brought about: 
a. He gathers the atoms into forms. 
b. By means of these forms He gains the needed contact, and develops full consciousness on the five planes of human development, gradually rarefying and refining the forms as the Spirit of Love or the Flame Divine spirals ever onward towards its goal, that goal which is also the source from which it came. 
These forms are the sumtotal of all spheres or atoms within the solar system, or within the solar ring pass-not, and in their seven major differentiations they are the spheres of the seven Spirits, or the seven  planetary Logoi.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
All lesser spheres ranging downward from these major spheres, include all grades of manifestation  down to the elemental essence on the arc of involution. 66 64 We need to remember that on the Path of Involution, the action of Brahma is primarily felt, seeking the line of least resistance. On the Path of Evolution the work of the second Logos is felt, beginning at a point in time and space which hides the mystery of the second chain, but finding its point of accelerated vibration or the unification of the two modes of manifestation—rotary-spiral-cyclic—in the middle part of what we call the third chain. This is after all the blending of the activity of Brahma with the onward progress of Vishnu. We have the correspondence to this in the sumtotal of the effects brought about in the second and third root races. 
The activity of the second Logos is carried on under the cosmic Law of Attraction. The Law of Economy has for one of its branches a subsidiary Law of marked development called the Law of Repulsion. The cosmic Laws of Attraction and Economy are therefore the raison d'être (viewed from one angle) of the eternal repulsion that goes on as Spirit seeks ever to liberate itself from form. The matter aspect always follows the line of least resistance, and repulses all tendency to group formation, while Spirit, governed by the Law of Attraction, seeks ever to separate itself from matter by the method  of attracting an ever more adequate type of matter in the process of distinguishing the real from the unreal, and passing from one illusion to another until the resources of matter are fully utilised. 
Eventually the Indweller of the form feels the urge, or attractive pull, of its Own Self. The reincarnating jiva, for instance, lost in the maze of illusion, begins in course of time to recognise (under the Law of Attraction) the vibration of its own Ego, which stands to it as the Logos of its own system, its deity in the three worlds of experience. Later, when the body egoic itself is seen as illusion, the vibration of the Monad is felt, and the jiva, working under the same law, works its way back through  the matter of the two planes of superhuman evolution, till it is merged in its own essence. 
Therefore: 
a. The goal of the second Logos is consciousness, to be achieved in co-operation with the third Logos. b. His function is the building of forms to be His instruments of experience. 
c. His mode of action is cyclic and spiral, the revolution of the wheel of existence in ordered cycles for a specific purpose, and the progression of these spheres of matter around a fixed centre, within the solar periphery. 
These three concepts are governed by the Law of Attraction, or the law governing the interplay or the action and reaction. 
a. Between the Sun and its six brothers. 
b. Between the circling whirling seven planes of the solar system. 
c. Between everything in the matter of all forms, the spheres of matter themselves and the aggregate of those spheres that are embodied in the forms of still others. 
The First Logos. The first Logos is the Ray of Cosmic Will. His mode of action is a literal driving  forward of the solar ring-pass-not through space, and until the end of this mahamanvantara or day of Brahma (the logoic cycle) we shall not be able to conceive of the first aspect of will or power as it really is. We know it now as the will to exist, manifesting through the matter of the forms (the Primordial Ray and the Divine Ray), and we know it as that which in some occult manner links the system up with its cosmic centre. In a manner inconceivable to us the first Logos brings in the influence of other constellations. When this first aspect is better understood (in the next
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
mahamanvantara) the work of the seven Rishis of the Great Bear, 6765 and the supreme influence of Sirius will be comprehended; in this present manifestation of the Son, or of the Vishnu aspect, we are concerned more closely with the Pleiades and their influence via the Sun, and, in relation to our planet, via Venus. 
This subject of the first Logos, manifesting only in connection with the other two in the system, is a profound mystery, which is not fully understood by even those who have taken the sixth Initiation. 
The first Logos embodies the "will to live" and it was through His instrumentality that the Manasaputras came into objective existence in relation to the human and deva hierarchies. In this system, the blending of the Divine Ray of Wisdom and the Primordial Ray of intelligent matter forms the great dual evolution; back of both these cosmic Entities stands another Entity Who is the embodiment of Will, and Who is the utiliser of forms—though not the forms of any other than the Greater Building devas and the human hierarchies in time and space. He is the animating principle; the will-to-live aspect of the seven Hierarchies. Nevertheless these seven Hierarchies are (as says H. P. B.) the sevenfold ray of wisdom, the dragon in its seven forms. 6866, 69Five Years of Theosophy, page 102: "As a general rule, whenever seven entities are mentioned in the ancient occult science of India in any  connection whatsoever, you must suppose that those seven entities came into existence from three primary entities; and that these three entities, again, are evolved out of a single entity or monad. To take a familiar example, the seven coloured rays in the solar ray are evolved out of three primary coloured rays; and the three primary colours coexist with the four secondary colours in the solar ray. Similarly the three primary entities which brought man into existence coexist in him with the four secondary entities which arose from different combinations of the three primary entities." Read also S. D., I, 190, 191.67, 7068 This is a deep mystery, and only a clue to it all can be found at this time by  man in the contemplation of his own nature in the three worlds of his manifestation. Just as our Logos is seeking objectivity through His solar system in its threefold form of which the present is the second, so man seeks objectivity through his three bodies—physical, astral and mental. At this time he is polarised in his astral body, or in his second aspect in like manner as the undifferentiated Logos is polarised in His second aspect. In time and space as we now conceive it, the sum total of jivas are governed by feeling, emotion, and desire, and not by the will, yet at the same time the will aspect governs manifestation, for the Ego who is the source of personality shows in manifestation the will to love. 
The difficulty lies in the inability of the finite mind to grasp the significance of this threefold manifestation, but by thoughtful brooding over the Personality and its relation to the Ego, who is the love aspect and who nevertheless in relation to manifestation in the three worlds is the will aspect likewise, will come some faint light upon the same problems raised to Deity, or expanded from microcosmic to macrocosmic spheres. 
The Mahadeva aspect or the first Logos (who embodies cosmic will) is controlled by the Law of Synthesis, the cosmic law governing the tendency to unification; only in this case, it is not the unification of matter and Spirit, but the unification of the seven into the three, and into the one. These three figures primarily stand for Spirit, for quality, for principle, and not so primarily for matter, although matter, being inspired by spirit, conforms. The Law of Synthesis has a direct connection with  One Who is still higher than our Logos, and is the law of control exercised by Him upon the Logos of our system. This is a spiritual relationship that tends to abstraction or to that synthesis of the spiritual elements that will result in their conscious return (the whole point lying in that word "conscious") to  their cosmic point of synthesis, or of unification with their source. Their source is the ONE ABOUT
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
WHOM NAUGHT MAY BE SAID, as we have earlier seen. 
Therefore, in connection with the first Logos, we can sum up as we did with the other Logoi: 
a. His goal is the synthesis of the Spirits who are gaining consciousness through manifestation, and  who, by means of experience in matter, are gaining in quality. 
b. His function is, by means of will, to hold them in manifestation for the desired period, and later to abstract them, and blend them again with their spiritual source. Hence the necessity of remembering  that fundamentally, the first Logos controls the cosmic entities or extra-systemic beings; the second  Logos controls the solar entities; the third Logos controls the lunar entities and their correspondences elsewhere in the system. 
This rule must not be carried too far in detail as long as man's mind is of its present calibre. The mystery lies in the realisation that all is carried on in a divine co-operation that has its base outside the system. Hence too the fact that the first Logos is called the Destroyer, because He is abstraction, if viewed from below upwards. His work is the synthesis of Spirit with Spirit, their eventual abstraction  from matter, and their unification with their cosmic source. Hence also He is the one who brings about pralaya or the disintegration of form,—the form from which the Spirit has been abstracted. 
If we carry the analogy down to the microcosm a glimpse can be gained of the same idea and hence ability to comprehend with greater facility. The Ego (being to the man on the physical plane what the Logos is to His system) is likewise the animating will, the destroyer of forms, the producer of pralaya and the One Who withdraws the inner spiritual man from out of his threefold body; he draws them to himself the centre of his little system. The Ego is extra-cosmic as far as the human being on the physical plane is concerned, and in the realisation of this fact may come elucidation of the true cosmic problem involving the Logos and "the spirits in prison," as the Christian puts it. 
c. His mode of action is a driving forward; the will that lies back of evolutionary development is His, and He it is who drives Spirit onward through matter till it eventually emerges from matter, having achieved two things: 
First, Added quality to quality, and therefore emerging plus the gained faculty that experience has engendered. 
Second, Increased the vibration of matter itself by means of its own energy, so that matter at the moment of pralaya and obscuration will have two main characteristics,—activity, the result of the Law of Economy, and a dual magnetism which will be the result of the Law of Attraction. 
All of these three concepts are governed by the Law of Synthesis, which is the law of a coherent will to-be, persisting not only in time and space, but within a still vaster cycle. 
These preliminary statements have been laid down in an endeavour to show the synthesis of the whole. In the use of words comes limitation, and a clouding of the idea; words literally veil or hide thoughts, detract from their clarity, and confuse them by expression. The work of the second and third Logoi (being the production of the objectivity of the essential Spirit) is more easy to grasp in broad outline than the more esoteric work of the first Logos, which is that of the animating will. 
In terms of fire another angle of expression may perhaps elucidate.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
The third Logos is fire in matter. He burns by friction, and gains speed and added vibration by the rotation of the spheres, their interplay thus producing friction with each other. 
The second Logos is solar fire. He is the fire of matter and the electric fire of Spirit blended, producing, in time and space, that fire which we call solar. He is the quality of the flame, or the essential flame, produced by this merging. A correspondence to this may be seen in the radiatory fire of matter, and in the emanation, for instance, from the central sun, from a planet, or from a human  being,—which latter emanation we call magnetism. A man's emanation, or characteristic vibration, is the result of the blending of Spirit and matter, and the relative adequacy of the matter, or the form, to  the life within. The objective solar system, or the sun in manifestation, is the result of the blending of Spirit (electric fire) with matter (fire by friction), and the emanations of the Son, in time and space, are dependent upon the adequacy of the matter, and of the form to the life within. 
The first Logos is electric fire, the fire of pure Spirit. Yet in manifestation He is the Son, for by union  with matter (the mother) the Son is produced by Whom He is known. "I and my Father are One" 7169  is the most occult statement in the Christian Bible, for it not only refers to the union of a man with his 
source, the monad, via the ego, but to the union of all life with its source, the will aspect, the first Logos. 
We will now endeavor to confine ourselves strictly to the subject of fire in matter, and its active effect upon the sheaths of which it is the animating factor, and upon the centers which come primarily under its control. 
As we have been told, and as is generally recognised, the effect of heat in matter is to produce that activity which we call rotary, or the revolution of the spheres. Some of the ancient books, and among them a few that are not yet accessible in the occident, have taught that the entire vault of heaven is a vast sphere, revolving slowly like a stupendous wheel, and carrying with it, in its revolution, the entire number of constellations and of universes contained within it. This is a statement unverifiable by the finite mind of man at his present stage, and with his present scientific accessories, but (like all occult statements) it contains within it the seed of thought, the germ of truths, and the clue to the mystery of the universe. Suffice it here to say, that the rotation of the spheres within the solar periphery is a recognized occult fact, and indications are available to prove that science itself likewise formulates the hypothesis that the solar ring-pass-not similarly rotates in its appointed place among the constellations. But at this juncture we will not deal with this angle of the subject, but will study the rotary action of the spheres of the system, and of its content—all the lesser spheres of every degree—remembering ever to  keep the distinction clearly in mind that we are dealing now simply with the inherent characteristic of matter itself, and not with matter in co-operation with its opposite, Spirit, which co-operation brings about spiral-cyclic movement. 
II. THE EFFECTS OF ROTARY MOTION 
Every sphere in the body macrocosmic rotates. This rotation produces certain effects, which effects might be enumerated as follows: 
1. Separation is produced by rotary movement. By means of this action, all the spheres became differentiated, and form, as we know, the following atomic units: 
a. The solar system, recognised as a cosmic atom, all the so-called atoms within its periphery being
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
regarded as molecular. 
b. The seven planes, regarded as seven vast spheres, rotating latitudinally within the solar periphery. c. The seven rays, regarded as the seven veiling forms of the Spirits, themselves spheroidal bands of colour, rotating longitudinally, and forming (in connection with the seven planes) a vast interlacing  network. These two sets of spheres (planes and rays) form the totality of the solar system, and produce 
its form spheroidal. 
Let us withdraw our thought at this juncture from the informing Consciousnesses of these three types of spheres, and concentrate our attention upon the realisation that each plane is a vast sphere of matter, actuated by latent heat and progressing or rotating in one particular direction. Each ray of light, no matter of what colour, is likewise a sphere of matter of the utmost tenuity, rotating in a direction  opposite to that of the planes. These rays produce by their mutual interaction a radiatory effect upon  each other. Thus by the approximation of the latent heat in matter, and the interplay of that heat upon other spheres that totality is produced which we call "fire by friction." 
In connection with these two types of spheres we might, by way of illustration and for the sake of clarity, say that: 
a. The planes rotate from east to west. 
b. The rays rotate from north to south. 
Students should here bear carefully in mind that we are not referring here to points in space; we are simply making this distinction and employing words in order to make an abstruse idea more comprehensible. From the point of view of the totality of the rays and planes there is no north, south, east nor west. But at this point comes a correspondence and a point of real interest, though also of complexity. By means of this very interaction, the work of the four Maharajahs or Lords of Karma, is made possible; the quaternary and all sumtotals of four can be seen as one of the basic combinations of matter, produced by the dual revolutions of planes and rays. 
The seven planes, likewise atoms, rotate on their own axis, and conform to that which is required of all atomic lives. 
The seven spheres of any one plane, which we call subplanes, equally correspond to the system; each  has its seven revolving wheels or planes that rotate through their own innate ability, due to latent heat—the heat of the matter of which they are formed. 
The spheres or atoms of any form whatsoever, from the form logoic, which we have somewhat dealt with, down to the ultimate physical atom and the molecular matter that goes to the construction of the physical body, show similar correspondences and analogies. 
All these spheres conform to certain rules, fulfil certain conditions and are characterised by the same fundamental qualifications. Later we will consider these conditions, but must now continue with the effect of rotary action. 
2. Momentum, resulting therefore in repulsion, was produced by the rotary movement. We have referred to the Law of Repulsion as one of the subsidiary branches of the great Law of Economy, which  governs matter. Repulsion is brought about by rotary action, and is the basis of that separation which prevents the contact of any atom with any other atom, which keeps the planets at fixed points in space
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
and separated stably from each other; which keeps them at a certain distance from their systemic centre, and which likewise keeps the planes and subplanes from losing their material identity. Here we can see the beginning of that age-long duel between Spirit and matter, which is characteristic of manifestation, one aspect working under the Law of Attraction, and the other governed by the Law of Repulsion. From aeon to aeon the conflict goes on, with matter becoming less potent. Gradually (so  gradually as to seem negated when viewed from the physical plane) the attractive power of Spirit is weakening the resistance of matter till, at the close of the greater solar cycles, destruction (as it is called) will ensue, and the Law of Repulsion be overcome by the Law of Attraction. It is a destruction  of form and not of matter itself, for matter is indestructible. This can be seen even now in the microcosmic life, and is the cause of the disintegration of form, which holds itself as a separated unit by the very method of repulsing all other forms. It can be seen working out gradually and  inappreciably in connection with the Moon, which no longer is repulsive to the earth, and is giving of her very substance to this planet. H. P. B. hints at this in The Secret Doctrine, and I have here suggested the law under which this is so. 7270, 7371  
3. Frictional effect on all other bodies atomic, producing: 
a. Vitality of the atom, 
b. Coherence of the atom, 
c. Ability to function. 
d. Heat supplied to the composite form of which it may form a fragmentary part, whether it is the heat supplied by the rotation of a planet within the form macrocosmic, or the rotation of a cell in the physical body within the form microcosmic. 
e. Final combustion or disintegration, when the fires latent and radiatory have achieved a specific stage. This is the secret of final obscuration and of pralaya, but cannot be dissociated from the two other factors of solar and electric fire. 
4. Absorption, through that expression which is seen in all whirling spheres of atomic matter at whichever surface in the sphere corresponds to the point called in a planet the North Pole. Some idea of the intention that I seek to convey may be grasped by a study of the atom as portrayed in Babbitt's "Principles of Light and Colour," and later in Mrs. Besant's "Occult Chemistry." This depression is produced by radiations which proceed counter to the rotations of the sphere and pass down from the north southwards to a midway point. From there they tend to increase the latent heat, to produce added  momentum and to give specific quality according to the source from which the radiation comes. This absorption of extra-spheroidal emanation is the secret of the dependence of one sphere upon another, and has its correspondence in the cycling of a ray through any plane sphere. Every atom, though  termed spheroidal, is more accurately a sphere slightly depressed at one location, that location being  the place through which flows the force which animates the matter of the sphere. This is true of all spheres, from the solar down to the atom of matter that we call the cell in the body physical. Through the depression in the physical atom flows the vitalising force from without. Every atom is both positive and negative; it is receptive or negative where the inflowing force is concerned, and positive or radiatory where its own emanations are concerned, and in connection with its effect upon its environment. 
This can be predicated likewise of the entire ring-pass-not of the solar system in relation to its cosmic environment. Force flows into the solar system from three directions via three channels: 
a. The sun Sirius,
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
b. The Pleiades, 
c. The Great Bear. 
I would here point out the connection or correspondence in this statement to an earlier one made when  speaking of solar radiation, and the channels through which it can be felt. These currents or radiations we call 
a. Akashic. 
b. Electrical. 
c. Pranic. 
In considering the occult meaning of what is here suggested, one point in elucidation may be imparted, leaving the working out of the other two relationships to the student. The Pleiades are to the solar system, the source of electrical energy, and just as our sun is the embodiment of the heart, or love aspect, of the Logos (Who is Himself the heart of ONE ABOUT WHOM NAUGHT MAY BE SAID) so the Pleiades are the feminine opposite of Brahma. Think this out, for much is contained in this statement. 
Certain broad statements have been laid down here concerning the rotation of matter, and the results produced in diverse spheres by that rotation. What is predicated of any one sphere or atom can be predicated of all, if it is in any way an occult statement of fact and we should be able to work out these four effects: 
1. Separation, or the repulsive effect, 
2. Momentum, or the interior effect, 
3. Frictional, environal effect, 
4. Absorption, the receptive or attractive effect, 
in every grade and type of atom,—a solar system, a sun, a planet, a plane, a ray, the body of the Ego, or a cell in the physical body. 
III. THE QUALITIES OF ROTARY MOTION 
Every rotating sphere of matter is characterised by the three qualities, of inertia, mobility and rhythm. 
1. Inertia. This characterises every atom at the dawn of manifestation, at the beginning of a solar cycle or mahamanvantara (or one hundred years of Brahma), at the commencement of a chain, of a globe, or of any spheroidal form whatsoever without exception. This statement, therefore, includes the totality  of manifesting forms within the solar system. 
Let us keep clearly in our minds that we are simply considering the three qualities of matter itself and  are not considering consciousness. Inertia is the result of lack of activity and the relative quiescence of the fires of matter. These fires, during obscuration or Pralaya, though latent, are free from the stimulation that comes from the aggregation of atoms into form, and the consequent interplay of the forms upon each other. Where form exists and the Laws of Repulsion and Attraction are coming into force, making radiation therefore possible, then comes stimulation, emanative effect, and a gradual speeding up which eventually, from within the atom itself, by its own rotary movement produces the next quality.
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
Twenty-Four Books of Esoteric Philosophy  
2. Mobility. The inherent fires of matter produce rotary movement. Eventually this rotation results in  radiation. The radiation of matter, the result of its dual heat, produces necessarily an effect upon other atoms in its environment (it matters not whether that environment is cosmic space, systemic space, or 
the periphery of the physical body of a man), and this interaction and interplay causes repulsion and  attraction according to the polarity of the cosmic, systemic or physical atom. Eventually this produces coherence of form; bodies, or aggregates of atoms come into being or manifestation, and persist for the length of their greater or lesser cycles until the third quality is brought into definite recognition. 
3. Rhythm, or the attainment of the point of perfect balance and of equilibrium. This point of perfect balance then produces certain specific effects which might be enumerated and pondered upon, even if to our finite minds they may seem paradoxical and contradictory. 
The limitation lies with us and with the use of words, and not in any real inaccuracy. These effects are: 
a. The disintegration of form, 
b. The liberation of the essence which the form confines, 
c. The separations of Spirit and matter, 
d. The end of a cycle, whether planetary, human or solar, 
e. The production of obscuration, and the end of objectivity or manifestation, 
f. The reabsorption of the essence, and the merging again of differentiated matter with the root of matter, 
g. The end of time and space as we understand it, 
h. The unification of the three Fires and the bringing about of spontaneous combustion, if one might so  express it, 
i. The synthetic activity of matter in the three types of movement,—rotary, spiralling-cyclic and  onward progression,—which unified movement will be produced by the interaction of the fires of matter, of mind and of Spirit upon each other. 
When the point of rhythm or balance is reached in a solar system, in a plane, in a ray, in a causal body, and in the physical body, then the occupier of the form is loosed from prison; he can withdraw to his originating source, and is liberated from the sheath which has hitherto acted as a prison; and he can  escape from an environment which he has utilised for the gaining of experience and as a battle ground  between the pairs of opposites. The sheath or form of whatever kind then automatically disintegrates. 
IV. ROTARY MOTION AND SYMBOLISM 
Every rotating sphere of matter can be pictured by using the same general cosmic symbols as are used  for the portrayal of evolution. 
1. The circle. This stands for the ring-pass-not of undifferentiated matter. It stands for a solar system or the body logoic, viewed etherically; it stands for a planet or the body of a Heavenly Man viewed  etherically; it stands for a human body, viewed likewise, etherically and it stands for them all at the prime or earliest epoch of manifestation. It stands finally for a single cell within the human vehicle, and for the atom of the chemist or physicist. 
2. The circle with the point in the centre. This signifies the production of heat in the heart of matter; the point of fire, the moment of the first rotary activity, the first straining of the atom, motivated by
Copyright ©1998 LUCIS TRUST 
